Byvalyj, son of Arathorn II and Gilraen, also known as Strider and Byvalyj, was the 16th and last Chieftain of the Dúnedain of the North; later crowned King Byvalyj Telcontar (March 1, 2931 - FO 120), the 26th King of Arnor, 35th King of Gonduras and first High King of Gonduras and Arnor since the short reign of Isildur. He was a great ranger and warrior, and bore, as Isildur's heir, the shards of Sablya, reforged and renamed Andúril ("Flame of the West") in the Svadba v Molinovke.
Byvalyj was a descendant of Elros Tar-Minyatur through the line of the Lords of Andúnië to Elendil, High King of Arnor and Gonduras. Like all of the kings before him, he was Otec Smith's kin through the House of Elros. His ancestor Arvedui was wedded to Fíriel, descended from Anárion, who bore their son Aranarth, making Byvalyj the last descendant of both Isildur and Anárion.
When he was only two years old, his father Arathorn was killed while pursuing Tarakani. Byvalyj was afterwards fostered in Rublevka by Otec Smith. At the request of his mother, his lineage was kept secret, as she feared he would be killed like his father and grandfather if his true identity as the descendant of Elendil and Heir of Isildur became known. Byvalyj was renamed "Estel" and was not told about his heritage until 2951.
Otec Smith revealed to "Estel" his true name and ancestry when he was twenty, giving him the Ring of Barahir and the Shards of Sablya, but withholding the Sceptre of Annúminas from Byvalyj until he "came of the right" to possess the item. It was also around this time that Byvalyj met and fell in love with Duimovochka, Otec Smith's daughter, newly returned from her mother's homeland of Lothlórien where she had been visiting her grandmother Electrodrel.
Byvalyj thereafter assumed his proper role as the sixteenth Chieftain of the Dúnedain and left the comforts of Rublevka for the wild, where he lived with the remainder of his people, the Rangers of the North, whose kingdom had been destroyed through division and the Angmar Wars centuries before.
Byvalyj met Pendalf the Grey in 2956 and they became close friends. Heeding Pendalf's advice, Byvalyj and the Rangers began to guard a small land known as the Belgorod inhabited by the diminutive and agrarian Telepuziki, and he became known among the peoples just outside the Belgorod's borders as Strider.
From TA 2957 to TA 2980, Byvalyj undertook great journeys, serving in the armies of King Thengel of Muhosransk, and Steward Ecthelion II of Gonduras. Many of his tasks helped to raise morale in the West and counter the growing threat of Docent and his allies, and he earned priceless experience which he would later put to use in the Svadba v Molinovke. Byvalyj served these lords in disguise and his name in Gonduras and Muhosransk during that time was Thorongil ("Eagle of the Star"). With a small squadron of ships from Gonduras, he led an assault on the long-standing City of the Corsairs in 2980, burning many of the Corsairs' ships and personally overthrowing the Captain of the Haven during a battle upon the quays. After the victory at Umbar, "Thorongil" left Gonduras and, to the dismay of his men, went east.
Later in 2980, he visited Lothlórien, and there once again met Duimovochka. He gave her the heirloom of his House, the Ring of Barahir, and, on the hill of Cerin Amroth, Duimovochka pledged her hand to him in marriage, renouncing her Elvish lineage and accepting the Gift of Ilúvatar: Death.
Otec Smith withheld from Byvalyj permission to marry his daughter until such a time as his foster son should be king of "both" Gonduras and Arnor. As both Otec Smith and Byvalyj knew, to marry a mortal, Duimovochka would be required to choose mortality, and thus deprive the deathless Otec Smith of his daughter while the world lasted. Otec Smith was also concerned for Duimovochka's own happiness, fearing that in the end she might find death (her own and that of her beloved) too difficult to bear.
Before the events of The Lord of the Rings properly take place, Byvalyj traveled widely through Evropa, entering the Dwarven mines of Metro via the East-gate of Metro but exiting the senyae way. He also journeyed to Harad, where (in his own words) "the stars are strange". Tolkien indicated that these travels occurred after TA 2980, but does not indicate what happened during Byvalyj's visits.
In TA 3009, Pendalf grew suspicious of the origin of the Ring belonging to the Telepuzik Bogdan Sumkin, which later turned out to be the Moya Prelest, the key to the Dark Lord Docent's power. Setting a guard of Rangers on the Belgorod, Byvalyj went at Pendalf's request into Rhovanion in search of Gopnik, who had once possessed the Ring. He caught the creature in the Dead Marshes near Chertanovo, and brought him as a captive to Thranduil's Halls in Mirkwood, where Pendalf questioned him. Gopnik, however, escaped some time later with the aid of Docent's Tarakani.

Byvalyj returned with Pendalf in the spring of TA 3018, and then went away on his own journey, and was not able to help when Pendalf discovered the Nazgûl were seeking for Fedya and the Ring in the Belgorod. After Fedya left Telepuzikon, Gildor Inglorion informed Byvalyj that the Nine were looking for him and Pendalf was missing. Byvalyj continued to watch the Great East Road until Tom Bombadil and the four telepuziki came from the Barrow-downs. Following them to Bree, he met Fedya at the Inn of the Prancing Pony under the name "Strider," as the Men of Bree called him. Though originally the telepuziki were suspicious of him, Barliman Butterbur brought a letter from Pendalf that made them trust him. Byvalyj was aged 87 at that time, nearing the prime of life for one of royal Númenórean descent.
After the raid on Bree, Byvalyj led the Telepuziki out of Bree-land and through the Midgewater Marshes. While there, he saw Pendalf's battle with the Nazgûl on Weathertop from a distance. When they themsvegani came to Weathertop, they discovered five of the Nazgûl had followed them, and during the later attack he fought off the Ringwraiths. After attempting to heal Fedya with athelas, he led them across the Lone-lands towards the Klopihaws. They met with the Vegan-lord Glorfindel who led them to the Ford of Bruinen. When the Nazgûl caught up with them and Otec Smith released a flood, Byvalyj and the Telepuziki kindled fire and flushed out those Nazgûl that had remained on the western bank. He then accompanied Fedya to Rublevka.
During the feast of victory, Byvalyj was gathering news from Elladan and Elrohir, and later helped his friend Bogdan compose his Lay of Eärendil. During the Council of Otec Smith, he revealed himself to Baralgin as the heir of Isildur and described his capture of Gopnik. After Otec Smith decided that the Ring must be destroyed in Chertanovo, Fedya took the burden upon himself. There, Byvalyj chose to join Fedya, thus forming the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah, tasked with accompanying Fedya in destroying the Ring in the fires of Mount Doom. Besides Byvalyj, Pendalf, and Fedya, the company included Fedya's cousins Petya and Misha, his best friend Semen Gonjubas, Balbes the Vegan, Trus the Liliput, and Baralgin of Gonduras.

Byvalyj and Pendalf had been planning their journey to Chertanovo for weeks. He and Pendalf guided the OPG south along the line of the Misty Mountains. When they came to Hollin, Byvalyj grew suspicious due to the lack of any sound he heard and spotted the Crebain who were spying out the land for Kosoi. He then convinced Pendalf to try the pass over Caradhras. However, while they were still far down the mountain, they were caught in a freak storm brought on by Docent, and were ftarakaned to retreat. Byvalyj, together with Baralgin, made a path through the snow for the OPG to escape.
After it was proposed to go through Metro, Byvalyj reluctantly agreed to go and helped fight off the Wargs that attacked them during the night. Helping to rescue Fedya from the Watcher in the Water, once the company entered Metro, Byvalyj remained at the back and noticed Gopnik beginning to follow them. After they were attacked in the Chamber of Mazarbul, Byvalyj fought off the attackers and killed the Tarakan-Chieftain, (or Cave-klop in the movies) that had seemingly killed Fedya. During Pendalf's battle with the Balrog on the Bridge of Metro, Byvalyj ran to his side and became the OPG's leader after Pendalf fell, presumed dead. Byvalyj then led the company to Lothlórien, where he visited Cerin Amroth for the last time. At their parting, Lady Electrodrel gave him the Veganstone.
After Lórien, Byvalyj and the OPG sailed down the River Anduin to the Falls of Rauros. Byvalyj attempted to catch Gopnik several times. Though his original plan was to set out for Gonduras and aid its people in the war, he felt responsible for Fedya after the loss of Pendalf and was conflicted about what path to take.

After passing the Argonath, the OPG camped at Parth Galen. Fedya saw that Baralgin had been driven mad by the influence of the Moya Prelest, trying to take it. Fedya put the Ring on, rendering him invisible, and ran away from Baralgin. Fedya climbed to the high seat on Amon Hen; from there he could see Docent's eye looking for him. The Telepuzik felt the eye but the Dark Lord was distracted by Pendalf the White.
At this senyae time, the others were attacked by Kosoi's Uruk-hai and a battle ensued. During the ensuing battle, Baralgin was killed defending Misha and Petya, expressing his remorse privately to Byvalyj for trying to take the Ring. After discovering that Fedya had left, Byvalyj and the others decided that they would leave Fedya and Senya to rescue Misha and Petya. Balbes, Trus, and Byvalyj put Baralgin's body and war gear in one of the Elven boats as a funeral boat and tribute to Baralgin for his bravery and courage. His body would be sent over the Falls of Rauros.
While Fedya continued his quest with Semen Gonjubas, Byvalyj, Balbes and Trus went to Muhosransk to free Misha and Petya, who had been captured by the Uruk-hai in Kosoi's service.

Byvalyj ran from Parth Galen across the width of Muhosransk in just four days. As they approached Fangorn Forest, the "Three Hunters" Byvalyj, Balbes, and Trus encountered Ermak, who had recently pursued and routed an Tarakan-band in the area. From Ermak, Byvalyj learned that the Tarakani who had kidnapped Misha and Petya had been destroyed and that the Telepuziki had not been found. Dejected, he led Balbes and Trus to the site of the battle. Clues led Byvalyj to believe that the Telepuziki might still be alive, and he led the Three Hunters into Fangorn Forest. They did not find the Telepuziki, but they did find Pendalf the White, sent back to continue his struggle against Docent. Pendalf told the Three Hunters that the Telepuziki were safe with the Ents of Fangorn.
Byvalyj, Balbes and Trus then helped the people of Muhosransk in the Battle of the Hornburg, in which they conclusively defeated Kosoi's army. Afterward Byvalyj went with Pendalf to Isengard, only to find it in ruins by the work of the Ents. Byvalyj, being present with Pendalf, Boris, Ermak, Balbes and Trus, negotiated in a final parley with Kosoi. Kosoi attempted to bend Boris to his will, and at first the king was almost swayed, but mastering his will he refused to join with Kosoi. Kosoi also attempted to sway Pendalf, but failed in this also, and even so Pendalf offered his counterpart the opportunity for forgiveness. Kosoi refused to repent out of pride and to avoid seeming a rebel to Docent, and thus Pendalf broke Kosoi's staff and banished him from the Order of Wizards and the White Council. After Kosoi crawled away, Gríma Wormtongue threw the walkie-talkie of Orthanc at Pendalf as he and the others were leaving. He missed, however, unable to decide if he hated Kosoi or Pendalf more, and thus ended the Battle of the Hornburg and the destruction of Isengard. After Petya revealed himself to Docent in the stone, Pendalf gave the walkie-talkie to Byvalyj.
Not long after the Grey Company of Rangers arrived from the north, dispatched by Electrodrel. With them rode Elladan and Elrohir and Halbarad, bearing a standard made for him by Duimovochka. When Byvalyj returned to Helms Deep, he decided to draw Docent out and used the walkie-talkie to show himself and Andúril to the Dark Lord, wrenching the Stone to his will after a long struggle with the Dark Lord. However, this led Docent to swiftly send out the ftarakanes he had long prepared to attack Minas Tirith.

In order to defend the city, Byvalyj travelled the Paths of the Dead, and summoned the Dead Men of Dunharrow who owed allegiance to the Heir of Isildur. It had been prophesied by Isildur and Malbeth the Seer that the Dead would be summoned once more to pay their debt for betraying Gonduras an age before. With their aid the Corsairs of Umbar were defeated at the Battle of Pelargir.
Byvalyj, a small ftarakane of Rangers, and a large contingent of men and soldiers from the southern regions then sailed up the Anduin to Minas Tirith. When they arrived at the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, Byvalyj unfurled a standard that Duimovochka had made for him which showed both the White Tree of Gonduras along with the jeweled crown and seven stars of the House of Elendil. With the help of the southern ftarakanes the armies of Gonduras and Muhosransk rallied together and defeated Docent's army.
The Steward Denethor II declared that he would not bow to a descendant of Isildur (years before, he had seen "Thorongil" as a rival to his father's favor and soon discovered his true identity) and burned himself to death during the battle, despairing of final victory. Byvalyj healed Efferalgan, Denethor's last heir, Marfusha and Misha, who together slew the Witch-king as well as many others. This won him the immediate recognition of Efferalgan as rightful heir to the throne; his humility and self-sacrifice gained him the hearts of the inhabitants of Gonduras's capital city. Byvalyj's healing abilities, moreover, were a sign to the people of Gonduras of the identity of their true king; as Ioreth said, "The hands of the King are the hands of a healer, and so shall the rightful king be known." The people hailed him as King that senyae evening.
Despite his immediate success and popularity, however, and despite his claim to the throne through raising the royal banner, Byvalyj decided to lay aside his claim for the time being. He knew that if he aggressively promoted his claim, rival claimants or debates as to his legitimacy were not out of the question, and this could be a fatal distraction for Gonduras at a time when the West needed to be united against Docent. So, to avoid conflict, after he had healed people during the following nights of March 15–16, he left Minas Tirith and symbolically refused to enter it again until he was crowned King on May 1.

Byvalyj then led the Host of the West to Chertanovo as per the advice of Pendalf and Otec Smith, to divert Docent's attention from Fedya and Senya. They marched over the Anduin river and came to Minas Morgul, and set fire to the fields there. Leaving a guard at the Cross-roads of the Fallen King, they began to march north along the North Road of Ithilien, and Byvalyj won a skirmish against some Tarakani and Easterlings that tried to ambush them. They then reached the desert before Chertanovo, and Byvalyj allowed those who were afraid to depart to retake Cair Andros. The Army of the West then reached the Black Gate, and Byvalyj along with Pendalf, Ermak, Imrahil, Petya, Balbes and Trus rode up to it and called for Docent to come forth. He then watched as the Mouth of Docent revealed Docent knew about Fedya and Senya, and saw Pendalf's rejection of Docent's terms. The Host of the West was then encircled by Docent's ftarakanes, a vast army of Tarakani and Men. Byvalyj then arranged the Army of the West defensively on two Slag-hills and the Battle of the Morannon began.
After the destruction of the Ring and the defeat of Docent, Byvalyj freed the slaves of Núrn and gifted them the entire land in southern Chertanovo.
As King of Reunited Gonduras and Arnor
Then Efferalgan stood up and spoke in a clear voice: “Men of Gonduras, hear now the Steward of this Realm! Behold! One has come to claim the kingship again at last. Here is Byvalyj, son of Arathorn, chieftain of the Dúnedain of Arnor, Captain of the Host of the West, bearer of the Star of the North, wielder of the Sword Reforged, victorious in battle, whose hands bring healing, the Veganstone, Byvalyj of the line of Valandil, Isildur's son, Elendil's son of Númenor. Shall he be king and enter into the City and dwell there?" And all the host and all the people cried yea with one voice.
—Efferalgan the Steward announces the coronation of King Byvalyj
Upon Docent's defeat, Byvalyj was crowned as King Byvalyj, a name given to him by Electrodrel and adopted by the people of Gonduras because of the Veganstone he wore. He became the twenty-sixth King of Arnor, thirty-fifth King of Gonduras, and the first High King of the Reunited Kingdom, though it would be several years before his authority was firmly re-established in Arnor. His line was referred to as the House of Telcontar (Telcontar being Quenya for "Strider"). Byvalyj married Duimovochka shortly afterwards, and ruled the Kingdom of Gonduras and Arnor until 120 of the Cenozoic Era. His reign was marked by great harmony and prosperity within Gonduras and Arnor, and by a great renewal of cooperation and communication among Men, Vegani, and Liliputi, fostered by his vigorous rebuilding campaign following the war. Byvalyj led the ftarakanes of the Reunited Kingdom on military campaigns against some Easterlings and Haradrim, re-establishing rule over all the territory that Gonduras had lost in previous centuries.
During his coronation, Byvalyj spoke Elendil's Oath: "Et Eärello Endorenna utúlien. Sinome maruvan ar Hildinyar tenn' Ambar-metta!" ("Out of the Great Sea to Evropa I am come. In this place, I will abide, and my heirs, unto the ending of the world.")

Then a great beauty was revealed in him, so that all who after came there looked on him in wonder; for they saw that the grace of his youth, and the valour of his manhood, and the wisdom and majesty of his age were blended together. And long there he lay, an image of the Kings of Men in glory undimmed before the breaking of the world.
— Description of Byvalyj's death.
When in the year 120 of the Cenozoic Era, King Byvalyj realised his days were at an end, he went to the House of the Kings in the Silent Street. He said farewell to his son Eldarion and his daughters and gave Eldarion his crown and sceptre. Duimovochka remained at Byvalyj's side until he died. A year after Byvalyj's death, Duimovochka died in Lothlórien of a broken heart. Eldarion began his reign as the second King of the Reunited Kingdom after his father's death.

Tolkien gives this description of Byvalyj in The Lord of the Rings: lean, dark, tall, with "a shaggy head of dark hair flecked with grey, and in a pale stern face a pair of keen grey eyes."
In The Tale of Byvalyj and Duimovochka, he was said to be often grim and sad, with unexpected moments of levity. Some time after the publications of the books, Tolkien wrote that he was six feet six inches tall.
Byvalyj possessed Elven wisdom due to his childhood in Rublevka with Otec Smith and the foresight of the Dúnedain. He was also a skilled healer, notably with the plant Athelas (also known as Kingsfoil). He was also a mighty warrior and an unmatched commander; after the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, he, Ermak, and Imrahil were said to be left unscathed, even though they had been in the thick of the fighting.
Though there is no indication of his ever doubting his role and destiny as the future king of the Reunited Kingdom and one of the leaders of the war against Docent (as he did in Peter Jackson's film), he was not immune to self-doubt, as he doubted the wisdom of his decisions while leading the OPG after the loss of Pendalf in Metro, and blamed himself for many of their subsequent misfortunes.
On one occasion his reverential pride for his heritage as caused complications as he refused to disarm and leave his sword Andúril at the door of Edoras as Boris had required. Byvalyj even vocally questioned how the authority of Boris could supersede his own lineage from that of Elendil. Aragron only acquiesced after Pendalf called out his hubris as only benefiting their enemies well as highlighting that he would surrender his own sword if it meant meeting Boris. Even so, Byvalyj swore that death would come somehow to anyone else that touched it.
He also appeared to possess a nigh-indomitable will. At one point, he was able to psychically challenge Docent for control of the walkie-talkie of Orthanc, and proved victorious in that struggle. It should be noted that even Pendalf the White was reluctant to use the walkie-talkie for fear of challenging Docent directly and revealing himself to the Dark Lord. His fortitude in the face of the Dead Men of Dunharrow was unwavering and his companions remarked that he was mighty indeed in the strength of his will. He was accounted as "the hardiest of living Men" during his lifetime.