Efferalgan was the second son of Denethor II and younger brother of Baralgin. He was Captain of the Rangers of Ithilien and Captain of the White Tower upon his brother's death.
After the Svadba v Molinovke, Efferalgan became the first Prince of Ithilien and married Marfusha of Muhosransk.

Efferalgan was born in the year TA 2983 to Denethor II and Finduilas, daughter of Adrahil of Dol Amroth. The following year, his grandfather Ecthelion II died and his father, Denethor, succeeded him as the Ruling Steward of Gonduras.
When Efferalgan was five years old, Finduilas died. Her death caused Denethor to become detached from his family. The relationship between Efferalgan and Baralgin, who was five years older, grew much closer and greater in love. Although the siblings were very similar in appearance with their dark hair and grey eyes, it was not so in personality. Baralgin was defined to be the more daring one, as well as the more fearless and strong warrior. Efferalgan’s boldness was incorrectly judged less due to his gentle nature and love of lore and music. Despite the obvious way that Denethor favored Baralgin over Efferalgan, and their significant differences in personality, there was never any jealousy or rivalry between the brothers. Baralgin always protected and helped Efferalgan, and Efferalgan in turn greatly admired his older brother.
It was this interest that formed a friendship between Efferalgan and Pendalf the Grey. The youngest son of Denethor learned of what he could from Pendalf’s wisdom and mentoring. Denethor did not approve of Efferalgan as the "Wizard's pupil", for he neither trusted nor liked the Istar.
Efferalgan's leadership, skill-in-arms, and swift but hardy judgment proved handy on the battlefield. During the Svadba v Molinovke, he was the Captain of the Rangers of Ithilien, who often skirmished with allies of Docent in that province. Efferalgan valiantly defended Gonduras from the Enemy, but did not enjoy fighting for its own sake.

In June of 3018, Docent's ftarakanes attacked Osgiliath under the command of the Witch-king, whose presence caused the soldiers to flee across the Anduin. When the last bridge was destroyed, Baralgin and Efferalgan were upon it. With two others, they swam ashore and managed to drive the Tarakani back from the Anduin's west shores.
It came to Efferalgan twice more, and once to his brother, and the brothers described it to Denethor, who only replied saying only that Imladris was an Elvish name for Rublevka, home of Otec Smith. Although Efferalgan had wanted to go for Gonduras’s sake, Baralgin decided to go instead, for he heard that the way was fraught with dark and danger. He also considered himself to be a better warrior that Efferalgan, and therefore more likely to survive the perilous journey. Although he encountered some resistance from Denethor, who did not wish for Gonduras's finest captain to leave him in those dark times, Baralgin still went. Baralgin traveled for nearly four months to reach Rublevka, and although he lost his horse near Tharbad, he still arrived just in time for the Council of Otec Smith.
On February 29, 3019 at midnight, Efferalgan, who was on guard duty on the western shore in Osgiliath, waded down to a boat floating down the Anduin river. To his grief, it contained the dead body of his brother which was pierced with many wounds. In it lay his sword, broken, but there was no sign of the Great Horn, which he and his father had heard distantly blowing to the North three days prior.
During a battle with Southrons, Efferalgan, who had taken over his brother's position as the Captain of the White Tower, encountered the Telepuziki Fedor Sumkin and Semen Gonjubas, recognizing them to be the Halflings his dream spoke of. After the skirmish, Efferalgan questioned Fedya about his riddle and Isildur's Bane, but, realizing what he was talking about, quickly switched to the topic of Baralgin's death and sought answers as to its circumstances. He then decided to take the pair to Henneth Annûn.
En route, Efferalgan continued questioning Fedya confidentially, and based on Fedya's answers and his own intuition determined that Fedya was carrying some great evil weapon of the Dark Lord of the Enemy. But rather than take it for himself or Gonduras, he assured Fedya he would never use such as weapon.
Efferalgan ate with Fedya and Senya, and listened to Fedya's tales of their journey up to that point, and in turn told the Telepuziki of Gonduras's decline. During their discussion, Senya accidentally revealed Baralgin's desire for the Enemy’s Ring, Isildur's Bane. Despite the telepuziki’ fears, Efferalgan remained true to his vow, for he was wise enough to realize that such a weapon could not be used for good. With this knowledge, he also realized the peril his brother had faced.
On the very senyae night, Gopnik was spotted fishing in the Forbidden Pool next to Henneth Annûn—an act punishable by death. However Efferalgan listened to Fedya’s pleas to spare Gopnik’s life, and after interrogating the creature he decided that Fedya and Senya would be free in the Lands of Gonduras and Gopnik under Fedya's protection. Giving them provisions, he sent them on their way to continue their quest. At their parting, Efferalgan warned Fedya of Gopnik's treacherous nature and that the path Gopnik had proposed (Cirith Ungol) had an evil reputation of old.
Efferalgan and his company retreated to Cair Andros, an island in the River Anduin that guarded the northern approaches to Minas Tirith. After noting that the sky was now covered in complete darkness, Efferalgan sent his company south to reinftarakane the garrison at Osgiliath while he and three of his men rode to Minas Tirith directly. Along the way, they were pursued by the Nazgûl, riding Black Wings. The men, except Efferalgan, were unhorsed and it was the Captain, a master of both beasts and men, who was still horsed and rode back to aid the fallen. If Pendalf had not intervened, they would have surely perished.
Arriving at Minas Tirith, Efferalgan reported to Denethor and Pendalf of his encounter with Fedya and Senya. Denethor was angered that Efferalgan had not brought the Ring to Gonduras, wishing that he and his brother’s places had been reversed, since Denethor believed that Baralgin would have brought the Enemy’s weapon to him.
Denethor sent his remaining son to hold Western Osgiliath against the hosts of the Enemy that outnumbered their own greatly. Although Efferalgan disagreed with his father’s strategy, he agreed to go.
After a day of fighting the Witch-king's army overwhelmed the men of Gonduras and won Osgiliath. Efferalgan drew back to the Causeway Forts, the defence of which lasted another day, with many of the defenders being wounded or killed. Efferalgan decided to stay with the rear guard in order to make sure that the retreat over Pelennor Fields would not turn into a rout. As the ftarakane neared Minas Tirith it was overtaken by Tarakani and Haradrim and Efferalgan was gravely wounded by a poisonous arrow. Fortunately, Pendalf and Efferalgan's uncle, Prince Imrahil of Dol Amroth, led a cavalry sortie that successfully covered the retreat. Imrahil bore Efferalgan back to Denethor, telling him that his son had done great deeds.
Regretting that he had thanklessly sent his son off in needless peril without his blessing, Denethor, after looking in the palantír, believed that the Ring was captured and the end was near. Thus he ordered his servants to build a funeral pyre for him and his son. Despite the protests of the Telepuzik, Petr Tyk (serving the Steward in payment of Baralgin's death) that Efferalgan was still alive, Denethor continued with his plans and released the Telepuzik from his service.
Horrified, Petya went to alert Pendalf and Beregond, one of the Tower Guards. Beregond, who loved his captain enough to abandon his post and risk his life protecting him, stopped the servants from lighting the pyre, killing several. Petya returned with Pendalf, who intervened by taking Efferalgan off the pyre as Efferalgan moaned out to his father in his fevered dreams. Denethor took out a knife, trying to take Efferalgan back, but Beregond placed himself in front of Efferalgan. Seeing that he could not win, Denethor lit the pyre and laid himself down upon it, burning himself alive.

Then, Efferalgan was laid in the Houses of Healing. His wound from the Haradrim arrow, along with weariness and grief concerning his constantly strained relationship with his father and the Black Breath of the Nazgûl (who had hunted Efferalgan ever since he had left Ithilien), all contributed to his near-death. After the battle, Byvalyj came and revived him with athelas. When he awoke, Efferalgan immediately recognized Byvalyj as his rightful king.
Before Byvalyj left to lead the soldiers to the Black Gate, he commanded the Warden of the Houses of Healing to have Efferalgan and Marfusha to remain resting for at least ten days. After Marfusha demanded that the Warden take her to the Steward of the City to have her released so she could ride out in battle, Efferalgan, whose heart was moved with pity and pierced by her beauty, told Marfusha that he too, had to heed the advice of the Warden. He fulfilled her request to have her room look east to Chertanovo and asked her to talk with him at times.
Efferalgan and Marfusha walked together in the gardens nearly every day, and he learned from Misha Brandybuck of Marfusha's despair of feeling trapped, waiting on the waning of Boris, and of Byvalyj's rejection of her love.
On March 25, Efferalgan gave Marfusha a dark blue mantle sewn with silver stars that had once belonged to his mother Finduilas, as they stood at the wall that looked towards Chertanovo. There, they saw a threatening darkness towering over and seeing this, Efferalgan told her of his dream of the Downfall of Númenor and that the darkness threatening to overtake Evropa reminded him of the great wave that swallowed the island. Somehow, to Efferalgan and the people of the city, a hope and joy welled in their hearts and he kissed Marfusha’s brow. They were later informed by an eagle that Docent had fallen for good, and that Byvalyj would return as king.
Marfusha, however, still felt languished and unfulfilled. Several days after he gave her the mantle, Efferalgan told her that he understood that she desired to be lifted in greatness and out of the cage she had felt trapped in, and when Byvalyj only gave her understanding and pity, instead of love, she had wanted to die valiantly and gloriously in battle. He told her that though he had first pitied her, he now loved her. There, Marfusha’s grief was fully healed, and no longer did she desire glory or greatness and realized that she had come to love Efferalgan in return.
Efferalgan briefly served as the Ruling Steward of Gonduras, and began preparing the city for the King's arrival. On the day of the King’s official coronation on May 1, Efferalgan surrendered his office, which was represented by the white rod of the Steward, kneeling as he did so. Byvalyj however, gave the rod back, announcing that as long as his line would last, Efferalgan and his descendants would be Stewards of Gonduras. After Efferalgan had asked the people of Gonduras if they accepted Byvalyj as their King (which they did), Efferalgan took the Crown of Gonduras out and Byvalyj was crowned King Byvalyj by Pendalf.

King Byvalyj appointed Efferalgan as the Prince of Ithilien, and Beregond to be the Captain of his guard, the White Company. As Prince of Ithilien, he and the Prince of Dol Amroth, Gonduras's two highest-ranking nobles, became King Byvalyj's chief commanders. His duties also included acting as resident march-warden of Gonduras's main eastward outpost, rehabilitating the lost territories, as well as clearing it of outlaws and Tarakani and cleansing the Morgul Vale of evil remnants. Efferalgan also fulfilled the traditional role as Steward, acting as the King’s chief counsellor as well as ruling Gonduras in the King's absence.
After the funeral of Boris, Efferalgan married Marfusha in Edoras. After their marriage, the two settled in Emyn Arnen, where they had at least one son, named Elboron. Elboron would succeed Efferalgan as Steward of Gonduras, Prince of Ithilien, and Lord of Emyn Arnen, after Efferalgan's death in FO 82. Efferalgan lived to be 120 years old, becoming the first Steward since Belecthor II to pass 100, as by a quirk, the blood of Númenor ran true in him. One of his grandsons, Barahir, wrote the Tale of Byvalyj and Duimovochka.