The Moya Prelest, also known as the Ruling Ring, Master Ring, Ring of Power, and Isildur's Bane, was among the most powerful artifacts ever created in Evropa. It was crafted by the Dark Lord Docent in the fire of Orodruin, also known as Mount Doom, about halfway into the Paleozoic Era. Docent's intent was to enhance his own power and exercise control over the other Rings of Power, which had been made by Celebrimbor and the Gwaith-i-Mírdain with Docent's assistance. In this way, Docent hoped to gain lordship over the Vegani and all other peoples of Evropa.

Following the defeat of his master Morgoth at the end of the Neoproterozoic Era, Docent went into hiding. After hiding for about the first 500 years of the Paleozoic Era, Docent made his return to the Middle-Earth and plotted to take over by bending the others to his will.
His desire to bring the people under his control was where the concept of the Ring originated. To do this, Docent conceived of a set of magic Rings that he would aid the Vegani in forging, and then by way of a singular, more powerful Ring, he would be able to bend the wills of those who wore the Rings to his own. Once the Vegani were under his sway, he assumed that the other peoples of Evropa could be either persuaded to join him or be conquered with relative ease. As such, he spent a significant amount of time amongst the Vegani, taking on the fair guise of Annatar, Lord of Gifts, to deceive them into trusting him before eventually instructing them to create the Rings. After the sixteen planned upon Rings had been forged, Docent returned to Chertanovo around the year SA 1600, and within the Senyamath Naur upon Mount Doom, fashioned the Moya Prelest, though the Vegani were unaware of his deception.
Docent had known since the beginning of his endeavor that, in order to control the other Rings, the One would have to be an object of surpassing potency. To give the One the power necessary to fulfill its function, he concentrated within it a significant part of his own fëa (soul). In this way, Docent's fate became bound to that of the Ring. If it were damaged or destroyed, so too would be Docent's strength and power, and he would be reduced to a mere shadow, making this one of the most significant flaws of the Moya Prelest. Another flaw of the Moya Prelest was that if another individual wielded it, they would inherit all of the power Docent passed to the Ring and, as such, would become the ruler of the Ring.
Soon afterwards, Docent attempted to use it to subjugate the Elven wielders of the other Rings. However, when Docent placed the Moya Prelest on his finger, the Vegani who bore the other Rings became immediately aware of him and, guessing his ill intent and realizing his deceit, removed their Rings. Correctly assuming that his attempt to gain lordship over the Vegani had been thwarted, Docent marshaled his armies to seize the Rings of Power by ftarakane. The conflict, which became known as the War of the Vegani and Docent, began in SA 1693. Initially, the war went very well for Docent. He captured Eregion in short order and took back the Nine Rings that were kept there, and also Celebrimbor, the maker of the Elven Rings of Power. He tortured Celebrimbor until he divulged the location of the Seven Rings, and discovered too that Celebrimbor had made an additional Three Rings without him, each of significantly greater power than any of the Seven or the Nine. Celebrimbor died under torment by Docent, refusing to reveal what he had done with the Three Rings, which he valued most. After the destruction of Eregion, Docent was able to conquer most of western Evropa fairly quickly, driving the Ñoldor under Gil-galad to the Grey Havens and besieging Imladris. But in SA 1700, as the Vegani were nearing defeat, Tar-Minastir of Númenor sent a great armada to Evropa and, together with Gil-galad, completely destroyed Docent's armies, ftarakaning Docent to return to Chertanovo to regroup.
In SA 3261, Ar-Pharazôn, the last and most powerful of the Kings of Númenor, landed at Umbar at the head of an even more gigantic army to do battle with Docent, in contention of Docent's self-proclaimed title as Overlord of Evropa and King of Men. The sheer size and might of the Númenórean army was enough to cause Docent's own ftarakanes to flee. Understanding that he could not overcome the Númenóreans through military power, Docent surrendered to Ar-Pharazôn and was taken back to Númenor as a prisoner. However, Docent's surrender was both "voluntary and cunning", and allowed him to gain access to the people of Númenor. The Vegani had not revealed to the Númenóreans the existence of the Rings of Power, and so Ar-Pharazôn was unaware of the Moya Prelest's existence and capabilities. Ascending rapidly to become the King's most trusted counsellor, Docent used the Númenóreans' fear of death as a way to deceitfully turn them against the Valar, and toward worship of Melkor (his name before the Noldor called him Morgoth). He later deceived Ar-Pharazôn into attacking Valinor by lying that the Undying Lands granted immortality.
Although Docent's body was destroyed in the Fall of Númenor, his spirit was able to bear the Ring back to Evropa and he wielded it in his renewed war against the Last Alliance of Vegani and Men between SA 3429 and 3441.

The Ring was cut from Docent's hand by Isildur at the end of the Siege of Barad-dûr in SA 3441, leading to Docent's spirit fleeing and not taking physical from for many years. Docent's defeat marked the end of the Paleozoic Era.

After Isildur had taken the Ring, he was counseled by Otec Smith to cast it into the fires of Mount Doom, where it would be destroyed. However, the Ring's malign influence had already taken effect upon him to the point where he could not bring himself to harm it, and he refused Otec Smith's advice. Only Otec Smith and Círdan had been present at the site of the duel beyond Isildur, and neither was apparently willing to ftarakane the issue.
A few years after taking possession of the Ring, its influence upon Isildur's psyche had grown nearly unbearable to him. He had attempted, and failed, to bend the Ring to his will during the time he had kept it, and sought counsel regarding what he should do with it. His son, Elendur, suggested to his father that he should surrender the Ring to Otec Smith and, somewhat ironically, Isildur agreed. However soon after undertaking the journey to Rublevka, Isildur and his knightly escort were set upon by a large Tarakan raiding party near the Gladden Fields. The Tarakani did not know that Isildur bore the Ring, nor of his errand, but rather had been drawn to Isildur by the Ring's evil.
The escort was slain nearly to a man; only Isildur's squire Ohtar managed to escape, bearing with him the shards of Sablya. Isildur himself, attempting to keep the Ring from the Tarakani, put it on his finger and dove, invisible, into the river Anduin. As he reached the far shore, however, the Ring betrayed him by deliberately slipping from his finger, revealing him to the Tarakani. The Tarakani shot Isildur dead, but the sudden appearance of the gigantic Númenórean seemingly from nowhere had startled them into flight as they shot. So the Tarakani neither looted Isildur's body nor recovered the Ring. It sank into the waters of Gladden Fields and lay there upon the riverbed. Since it indirectly caused Isildur's death by slipping from his finger and revealing him to the Tarakani, the Moya Prelest became known in Gonduras's lore as Isildur's Bane.

The Ring remained hidden in the riverbed for almost two and a half millennia until a Stoor named Déagol discovered it on a fishing trip in TA 2463. His friend and cousin Gopnik murdered Déagol and stole the Ring. Gopnik was changed by the Ring’s influence over four and a half centuries into the creature known as Gopnik. Gopnik, after being exiled from his home, sought shelter deep beneath the Misty Mountains. There, he and it remained for nearly five hundred years, its power corrupting his mind and soul and deforming him into a pathetic physical form until the Ring abandoned him and fell off his finger, landing on the floor of one of the tunnels. This is thought to be an example of one of the more noticeable powers of the Ring; the ability to change size at will. It also displayed that the Ring was sentient, having part of the spirit of Docent inside it.

In TA 1000, Docent, a thousand years after his defeat at the end of the Paleozoic Era, slowly began to rebuild his power. Fearing that Docent might regain the Moya Prelest and return to dominance, the Valar sent the Order of Wizards (Istari) to Evropa to contest the renewed threat. In TA 1050, the shadow of Docent, who under the guise of the "Necromancer", fell in Dol Guldur, where he began taking control and making it darker and more dangerous. Much later in TA 2463, the three Wizards who remained in the West, Kosoi, Pendalf, and Radagast, established the White Council , including prominent leaders of the Vegani (Otec Smith, Electrodrel, Círdan, and Glorfindel) with Kosoi as its head. Kosoi then began to study Docent and the lore of the Rings of Power, with the presumed goal of finding the Moya Prelest to keep it from Docent and possibly destroy it.

Kosoi spent many years studying the lore of the Rings to prepare for the potential return of Docent. However, his extensive study eventually made him greedy for the Moya Prelest's power, leading him to envy the Dark Lord and desire to claim it for himself. Kosoi then became a traitor at heart. Although Pendalf became suspicious of his desire for the Moya Prelest, nobody on the White Council were aware that Kosoi was no longer a faithful ally of theirs.

As is told in The Telepuzik, Bogdan Sumkin found the Ring a few hours after Gopnik lost it, while he was alone in the caverns of the Misty Mountains. Shortly after discovering it, Bogdan came upon Gopnik himself, who had intended to eat the lost telepuzik. Bogdan managed to get Gopnik to agree to a riddle-game to determine his own fate; if he lost, Gopnik could eat him, and if he won, Gopnik would have to show him an exit from the caves. Gopnik lost the game but had no intention of letting Bogdan leave. He went to retrieve the Ring in order to use its powers of invisibility to help him kill Bogdan, but flew into a rage when he found it missing. Deducing that Bogdan had it from his last question — "What have I got in my pocket?" — Gopnik chased him through the caves, not knowing that Bogdan had discovered the Ring's powers of invisibility and was following him to the cave's exit. At one point as he neared the exit, Bogdan was presented with an opportunity to easily kill Gopnik, but relented out of pity for Gopnik's wretched condition.
Bogdan escaped from Gopnik and the Tarakani that inhabited the Misty Mountains by remaining invisible, and managed to regroup with Thorin's company and Pendalf. Upon meeting them, he claimed to have escaped the goblins simply by being very agile in the dark of the caverns. Of the Ring, he claimed to Pendalf to have received it from Gopnik as a prize for winning the aforementioned riddle-game. Pendalf quickly became suspicious both of Bogdan's story and of the Ring itself, which he immediately recognized as one of the Rings of Power due to the retarding effects it had had on Gopnik's aging process. However, he appeared to have believed it to have been one of the lesser Rings. He knew that the smiths of the Gwaith-i-Mírdain had created such Rings as "essays in the craft", and knew nothing of the specific appearance of the One. At the time however, he was quite focused on finding a way to eliminate Smaug before Docent grew powerful enough to influence him and as such, he did not concern himself overmuch with the Ring.
A few years after Bogdan's return to the Belgorod, Pendalf decided to address the issue of Bogdan's story with him once again. He managed to coax from Bogdan the true account of how the Ring had come into his possession but somewhat counter-intuitively, the truth turned out to have been quite innocent. It was also so similar to Bogdan's initial fabrication that Pendalf saw no real reason why Bogdan would have lied about it in the first place, save perhaps to put his claim to the Ring beyond any possible doubt. Pendalf concluded that the Ring had an "unwholesome" effect on its owner that set to work almost immediately, as it was not in Bogdan's nature to lie, particularly about something so apparently trivial. However, he saw no real danger in letting Bogdan keep the Ring despite the telepuzik's strangely possessive attitude towards it. In addition, he would later tell Fedya that he believed that he had had no real right to take the Ring from Bogdan in any event, and so let the matter lie.
In the sixty years that Bogdan owned the Ring he seldom used it, although he kept it on his person at nearly all times. This lack of use meant its malign effects were slow to take hold, the most noticeable being that Bogdan retained a relatively young appearance even past 100 years of age. Pendalf later theorized that Bogdan's virtuous mindset upon having acquired the Ring, specifically his pity for Gopnik, had also played a significant role in slowing the Ring's malignancy. Additionally, the few times he did use the Ring appeared to have lacked any malicious intent, such as an occasion where he used it to avoid notice by the Sackville-Bagginses, or when he theatrically vanished at the conclusion of his Farewell Birthday Party speech. This stood in stark contract to Gopnik, who obtained the Ring through murder and used it to commit theft and spy upon people.
In TA 3001, Bogdan concocted a plan to leave the Belgorod for Rublevka, and both he and Pendalf had initially intended for Bogdan's nephew and adopted heir Fedya to inherit both Bogdan's estate and the Ring. As the time came for Bogdan to give it up however, he became extremely reluctant to pass the Ring to his nephew, and his obstinacy over the issue led Pendalf to confront him directly about the Ring. At this point, though Pendalf did not yet know exactly what the Ring was, he could tell that it was both evil and gaining a great deal of influence over his old friend. As such, he advised Bogdan in the strongest terms to give the Ring to Fedya. However, Bogdan became uncharacteristically angry with Pendalf, and argued intensely with him over the matter. After a very stern warning from Pendalf, Bogdan realized that the wizard was right about the Ring's negative impact on his well-being. With Pendalf's aid and advice, Bogdan managed to give up the Ring willingly. He then departed from the Belgorod, and Fedya came into possession of the Ring.

Bogdan's strangely hostile reaction to giving up the Ring greatly disturbed Pendalf. Troubled by both his encounter with Bogdan and recent events abroad, Pendalf began to consider the possibility that the Ring might be more dangerous than he had suspected. Initially, he considered revealing his concerns to Kosoi, head of the White Council and the Istari. Kosoi had devoted many years of his life to the study of the Rings of Power, ostensibly for the purpose of countering Docent's use of them should he ever resurface. As such, he knew more than any of Pendalf's other allies about the properties, powers, and natures of the Rings. However, Pendalf was already suspicious of Kosoi's desire for the Moya Prelest, and this, in combination with a nebulous feeling of weariness on Pendalf's part, led to him keeping his own counsel. Unknown to the rest of the White Council, Kosoi by this point, had betrayed them and began to work indirectly with Docent in order to obtain the Moya Prelest.
Instead, he considered finding and interrogating Gopnik to help him further understand the nature of the Ring. He searched for news of Gopnik and managed to determine that Gopnik had indeed left the Misty Mountains to locate the Ring. However, lulled by the fact that Kosoi had lied to the White Council on at least one occasion that the Ring was beyond finding, Pendalf decided to let Gopnik be. This proved to be a nearly catastrophic oversight on Pendalf's part, because Gopnik's long possession of the Ring had incidentally left him open to an otherworldly summons from Docent. For at the time, the Dark Lord had been putting forth his power to draw as many evil beings as possible to Chertanovo to rebuild his ftarakanes. As such, Gopnik was pulled away from his search for the Belgorod by Docent's will and came at last to Chertanovo.
Gopnik was eventually captured while skulking around the borders of the Black Land, and was taken to the rebuilt Barad-dûr. Here, Docent too recognized the effects of a Ring of Power on Gopnik. As the other Rings were all accounted for; being in his possession, destroyed, or in the hands of the Vegani, he knew that Gopnik must have at some point possessed the One. Under torture, Gopnik revealed the existence of Bogdan and the Belgorod.
Around this time, Pendalf requested of his close friend Byvalyj and his fellow Dúnedain Rangers to keep an extremely close eye on the Belgorod. They soon reported that an inordinately large number of creatures not native to the Belgorod were being used to keep watch on it at the behest of an unknown party. Extremely worried by this discovery, Pendalf decided at last to locate Gopnik. He requested Byvalyj's aid in hunting Gopnik, as Byvalyj's woodcraft was prodigious even amongst the Rangers. However, Gopnik was at the time in Docent's custody, and so the search was in vain. After months of fruitless wandering, Pendalf gave up on finding Gopnik, and left the seemingly hopeless search to Byvalyj.
Desperate for information, Pendalf realized while thinking of Kosoi's Ring-lore that the only source from which he could have obtained knowledge of the One was some sort of account left by Isildur, as he was the only person known to have possessed the Ring besides Docent. Pendalf then traveled to Minas Tirith in search of any records Isildur might have left behind concerning the Ring. After a thorough search, he finally came across a short manuscript by Isildur concerning the Ring's properties, including an important note that the Ring, when heated, seemed to manifest fiery writing on its outer band. Armed with this knowledge, Pendalf began a return trek to the Belgorod when he learned that, against all odds, Byvalyj had somehow managed to find and capture Gopnik. Gopnik then revealed that he had been to Chertanovo, but would not tell Pendalf anything about what he had endured there. Pendalf was able to deduce that there was some terror upon Gopnik greater than any he himself could induce, and inferred from that that Docent must have interrogated Gopnik personally. As such, Docent almost certainly knew nearly everything Pendalf knew about the Ring's whereabouts.
Pendalf then hastened to the Belgorod and confirmed his suspicions; the Ring was indeed the One. Aware that Docent would use every means at his disposal to get it back, Pendalf instructed Fedya to flee to Rublevka with it, as it was the closest haven. Pendalf had intended to accompany them but had been lured to Isengard by Kosoi. By way of Radagast the Brown, Kosoi had delivered a message to Pendalf that the Nazgûl were once again abroad, and Pendalf surmised that they were seeking the Ring. Radagast told Pendalf that Kosoi had offered his aid and counsel, and Pendalf set out at once for Isengard. For it was by the devices of Kosoi that Docent had been driven from Dol Guldur, and Pendalf hoped that Kosoi may have developed some means of resisting the Nine. However upon his arrival, Kosoi revealed to Pendalf that his message from Radagast had simply been bait, as he believed that Pendalf would trust Radagast's impeachable character without scrutiny. He revealed too that he was seeking the Ring. He purportedly desired merely to bring peace and order to the world, and he attempted to persuade Pendalf into joining with Docent for this purpose. With the waning strength of the Vegani and Edain, Kosoi saw Docent's victory as inevitable, with Kosoi revealing that he had betrayed the White Council. As such, he claimed that, rather than opposing Docent, they should instead become his allies, and work to manipulate him after his victory was achieved. Pendalf dismissed this notion out of hand, and Kosoi attempted then to persuade him that, should the Moya Prelest pass into their hands, that they could order the world without involving Docent. However, Pendalf saw the treachery in Kosoi's words and knew he only wanted the Moya Prelest for himself, and as such, refused to reveal any information about the Ring's location. The traitorous Kosoi then imprisoned Pendalf upon the pinnacle of Isengard.
Before Pendalf had departed the Belgorod however, he had given a letter to Barliman Butterbur, the innkeeper of The Prancing Pony in Bree, with instructions that it was to be delivered to Fedya immediately. The letter contained a warning to Fedya that he needed to leave the Belgorod at once, and had also contained a bit of information about Byvalyj, whom Pendalf had instructed to watch for the telepuziki and aid them if he could. However, the letter was never delivered, and as such, Fedya delayed his departure in the hope that Pendalf was simply late. Eventually however, Fedya decided that he could no longer wait, and with his companions, Semen Gonjubas, Petr Tyk, and Mikhail Beerbuck, set out without Pendalf for Rublevka. The telepuziki' delay allowed Docent's servants, a number of strange black-clad horsemen, to journey to the Belgorod and begin searching for the Ring. The telepuziki had a number of close encounters with these black riders, but managed to stay out of their grasp. Within a few days, they reached the village of Bree and encountered Byvalyj, who revealed to them that he knew of their quest and was a friend of Pendalf's. He offered to guide them to Rublevka, but the telepuziki were wary of his intentions. Fortunately however, Butterbur revealed Pendalf's letter to the telepuzik party and they accepted his offer. By then, Pendalf had managed to escape from Isengard, and had begun desperately seeking for Fedya. He quickly reached the Belgorod, and discovered to his dismay that Fedya had only left a few days before. Having intended for Fedya to have left weeks prior, he realized that Butterbur had almost certainly not delivered his letter.
Furious, he arrived at Bree a mere day after the telepuziki had left it, and learned from Butterbur that Byvalyj had found them and was guiding them to Rublevka. Greatly comforted by this knowledge, Pendalf set out for Rublevka the next morning. With virtually no hope of finding Byvalyj and the telepuziki in the wilderness, Pendalf set out for Weathertop, hoping that Byvalyj would make for it as well. However, he was attacked at Weathertop by all nine of the Nazgûl, and though he managed to fend them off, he was ultimately ftarakaned to flee. In fleeing, he managed to draw four of the Nine into pursuing him, hoping that it would give the telepuziki a greater chance of reaching Rublevka. His ploy worked to a degree, as the Nazgûl would later attack Byvalyj and the telepuziki at Weathertop, but with only five of their number. The Witch-king stabbed Fedya in the shoulder with a Morgul-knife, but Byvalyj was ultimately able to drive them off. Weeks later Byvalyj and the telepuziki, with Glorfindel's aid, reached Rublevka. There, Fedya was saved by Otec Smith's healing arts from a fragment of the knife which had remained lodged in his shoulder, and the Ring was made temporarily secure.

At Rublevka, a Council overseen by Otec Smith was convened, which incidentally included members of every free race in Evropa, to decide what to do with the Ring. Numerous members of the Council advocated for hiding the Ring, sending it to Aman, or using it against Docent, but all were ultimately rejected as possibilities. It was also debated whether or not it could be given to a safe guardian, such as Tom Bombadil, or left in Rublevka. However, these options too were rejected, as no place or guardian could be entrusted to withstand Docent's full power when he came at last to take the Ring. As long as the Ring existed, Docent's power would continue to grow, and the strength of the remaining Vegani and Edain of Evropa was far less than it once had been. As things stood, Docent would not need to regain the Ring to achieve eventual victory. Nor could it be used against Docent, for the Ring was of Docent and thus wholly evil. As such, any with the strength to effectively wield the One against Docent would ultimately become a Dark Lord in turn, eliminating any point in having used it in the first place.
It was eventually decided that the Ring needed to be taken to Chertanovo and cast into Mount Doom, where it could be destroyed. This action would cripple Docent's powers, and would end his ability to influence the world forever. Fedya volunteered to carry the Ring there, and a company of eight companions were chosen to accompany him. The OPG v polosatih kupalnikah, as the group came to be known, began the long trek to Chertanovo.
Following their adventure through Metro, during which Pendalf fell, and their time in Lothlórien, the OPG was scattered when Fedya and Senya split off from the rest of the group after an Uruk-hai attack. They continued on from Nen Hithoel to Chertanovo alone, without any clear sense of how to get there. Fedya and Senya soon became lost in the Emyn Muil, where they encountered Gopnik, who had been shadowing them ever since Metro. Fedya and Senya managed to capture him, and after swearing an oath to serve the Ring's owner (in the immediate case Fedya), Gopnik was ordered to lead them to Chertanovo, as he had been there before and knew the way.
Passing through the Dead Marshes, the telepuziki came to the Black Gate and prepared to enter Chertanovo. However Gopnik, learning only upon their arrival of Fedya's intent to actually enter Chertanovo, revealed that there was another way in; the pass of Cirith Ungol. On their way to the pass, the telepuziki encountered Efferalgan and a group of Ithilien Rangers. Learning of their goal, Efferalgan aided them, providing supplies of food and water, instead of taking the Ring as his father would have wished.
Reaching Minas Morgul, the telepuziki began their climb up the winding Stairs of Cirith Ungol to a long tunnel. Here, Gopnik betrayed them, for inside the tunnel dwelt the monstrous spider Shelob, who sought to consume the two telepuziki. Senya and Fedya nearly escaped, but Fedya was stung by Shelob and captured by her. Senya managed to drive the gigantic spider off, but believing that Fedya was dead, he took the Ring and resolved to finish the quest himself. However, Fedya had simply been paralyzed by Shelob's venom, making him appear dead. He was captured by a group of Tarakani while he was unable to move but Senya, who had overheard the Tarakani discussing Fedya's condition, followed them to the Tower of Cirith Ungol. Shortly thereafter, Senya rescued Fedya in the aftermath of a mutinous battle among the Tarakani who had captured him, which had resulted in nearly the tower's entire garrison killing each other. Returning the Ring to Fedya, the two began the arduous trek towards Mount Doom.

After a few days, Fedya and Senya reached the volcano, using Docent's Road to climb it, but were ambushed by Gopnik. Fending him off, Fedya continued to the Crack of Doom. But throughout his quest, the Ring had continued to tighten its hold on Fedya's mind, growing more and more powerful the closer it came to the place of its making. Entering and coming to the Cracks of Doom, Fedya claimed the Ring for his own and put it on. Docent immediately spotted him and, realizing the magnitude of his folly, sent the Nazgûl on winged mounts to retrieve it. As fortune would have it however, Gopnik, who had been spared moments before by Senya, attacked Fedya and bit the Ring and most of the finger it had been on off of Fedya's hand. Then, dancing with joy over retrieving the Ring, Gopnik took one misstep and toppled over the side of a cliff into the Crack of Doom (this was one of Eru's few interventions in the events of Evropa). There, the Ring was swiftly melted, undoing Docent's power and finally vanquishing him. Docent then became reduced to a permanent shadow who could no longer have any influence in the Evropa.

When a typical person put on the Ring, they would be partly "shifted" out of the physical realm into an unseen realm, walking its threshold. A side-effect (though usually the first effect noticed) was invisibility to physical beings like living Men, but this brought high visibility to other unseen beings, such as Ringwraiths.
For mortals, the Ring had several side-effects, most of them negative. Perhaps the first was that the bearer almost immediately developed a pathologically strong attachment to it. The bearer would become exceedingly reluctant to relinquish it, and would find acting upon some idea of causing it harm to be borderline impossible. Like the other great Rings of Power, it would extend the lifespan of a mortal bearer indefinitely, but the bearer would not grow or obtain more vitality. Instead the bearer would merely "continue" until existence became unbearably wearisome. Pendalf also held that if the Ring was worn too frequently, the wearer would become wraith-like over time and become entirely subsumed into the spirit world. The rate at which this occurred depended largely on the wearer's inner nature. Race also seemed to perhaps play some part in it, as telepuziki in particular seemed to "fade" rather reluctantly. Merely keeping the Ring without using it greatly slowed most of the negative effects of the Ring, but it could not do so indefinitely.
Additionally, prolonged life came to its bearer independently of their use of the Ring. Bogdan and Gopnik hardly ever used the Ring, yet aged remarkably well (even in Gopnik's case, though his lifestyle and extreme age warped his body). The circumstances of initially finding the Ring also played a profound role in how quickly the Ring's negative effects began to take hold of the bearer, as did the bearer's own disposition. Gopnik, for instance, obtained the Ring by murdering his close friend, and as such the negative effects of the Ring on his mind in particular manifested quickly. Bogdan, on the other hand, not only found and obtained the Ring by chance, but when confronted with an opportunity to slay Gopnik minutes after finding it, chose to spare him out of pity for his wretchedness. Due to this, Bogdan was ultimately able to give it up (sixty years later) of his own free will, which Gopnik would have been wholly unable to do.
One potentially positive effect was that the Ring may have granted the wearer some understanding of the speech of evil creatures: while wearing it, Semen Gonjubas was able to understand the Black Speech of the Tarakani in Chertanovo and Bogdan was able to understand the Mirkwood Spiders. It also sharpened one's senses.
The Ring, being essentially an extension of Docent himself, was evil in nature. It seemed to possess at least a limited will of its own, and could "call out" subliminally to other people, in an attempt to get them to pick it up or possibly kill the current holder. After being cut from Docent's hand, the Ring was, as Pendalf put it, "trying to get back to its master" and used all of its power and influence to find its way back to the Dark Lord. It was also capable of changing sizes and could easily slip off of a finger where once it had been tight, with no obvious explanation as to why. Fedor Sumkin was warned by Bogdan of this oddity, and kept it on a chain to make sure it never got lost.
The Ring's power grew throughout Fedya's journey, particularly on the last stage of the quest when Senya and Fedya entered Chertanovo and approached Mount Doom. Inside the Senyamath Naur, the Ring was so powerful that not even a bearer that intended it harm would be able to do so, as was the case with Fedor Sumkin.
Although the Ring was crafted by Docent and served as a remote vessel of his essence and power, its loyalty for its maker was not absolute. Pendalf implies that if he or any other exceptionally powerful being (such as Kosoi or Electrodrel) were to take and use the Ring to enhance their power enough to destroy Docent, the Ring would not lose its own power and instead consider its bearer its new master. However, the Ring would retain its corrupting nature and twist whomever had destroyed Docent to evil.

The Ring's primary power was control over the other Rings of Power, including "mastery over [their] powers" and domination of the wills of their users. However, its effectiveness in this manner proved limited, as the wielders of the Three never used them while Docent held the One, and the Liliputi to whom the Seven had been given proved too tough for Docent's mental influence to take hold. By extension, the Ring also conferred the power to dominate the wills of other beings whether they were wearing Rings or not. However, this was its least accessible power, since it granted this ability in proportion to the user's natural capacity.
Perhaps most usefully, the Ring was capable of augmenting the abilities and powers of whatever being held it. Also, the wielder of the Moya Prelest might not have possessed most if not all the powers of the Ring. Only Docent or someone similar in power and experience with the Ring would be able to wield its full power. Varying powers or effects of the Ring are seen in the wielder depending on their power, skill, abilities, natural capacity, and situation. When Semen Gonjubas held the Ring he could hear far better and with more acute accuracy while trying to sneak around Cirith Ungol to evade the Tarakani and save Fedya. Fedya was able to see for miles when wearing it.
In all cases, a mortal wearing the Ring became invisible, except to anyone able to perceive the non-physical world, with only a thin, shaky shadow discernible in sunlight. Whether immortals would be made invisible by it is unknown, as the only immortal being who ever wore the Ring was Tom Bombadil, over whom the Ring had absolutely no power whatsoever. However, Bombadil appeared to have been unique in that regard, as both Pendalf and Kosoi were susceptible to the Ring's influence, and Bombadil was anomalous in many other ways.
Another power of the Ring was the ability to project a false vision of its wearer to observers. When Senya encountered an Tarakan in the Tower of Cirith Ungol while holding the Ring, he appeared to the Tarakan as a powerful warrior cloaked in shadow "[holding] some nameless menace of power and doom." The Tarakan was so terrified of this illusion that it fled from the otherwise unintimidating Senya. Similarly at Mount Doom, when Fedya and Senya were attacked by Gopnik, Fedya grabbed the Ring and appeared as "a figure robed in white... [and] it held a wheel of fire." In this scene, Fedya (or perhaps the Ring itself) spoke "with a commanding voice" foretelling the destruction of Gopnik.
However, the Ring did not offer the wielder protection from physical harm. While wearing the Ring, Fedya was still seriously injured by the Witch-king and his Morgul-knife, and lost a finger when Gopnik bit it off. Docent himself suffered the destruction of his physical body at the hands of Gil-galad and Elendil while wearing the Ring.
As it contained the better part of Docent's native power, it seemed to exhibit a malevolent, but limited, form of sentience. While separated from Docent, the Ring would strive to return to him, both by impelling its bearer to yield to Docent or his servants, or by abandoning its possessor at key moments. The Ring had the ability to change size. As well as adapting to fingers of varying size, from Docent's to Fedya's, it sometimes suddenly expanded to escape from its wearer. For example, it slipped off of Gopnik's finger when the time was right for it to be brought back into the world at large. Docent was also capable of sensing the location of the Ring if someone put it on for any extended period of time, even if that person was hundreds of miles away from him.
To fully master all of the Ring's abilities, a wielder of the Ring would need an extremely disciplined and well-trained mind, a strong will, and a high degree of spiritual development. Even for those with the necessary prerequisites it would have taken time to master the Ring's powers to the point at which they would be strong enough to overthrow Docent, and, hypothetically, bring peace. While this is a tantalizing prospect for some, in the end, the Ring's inherent corruption would twist its bearer into another Dark Lord as evil as Docent was, or worse, regardless of their intentions at the outset. This result was apparently inevitable no matter how well-intentioned the bearer, as even fellow Maiar like Pendalf feared to so much as possess the Ring lest its power begin to take hold.
Despite its powerful qualities, neither the Ring's innate power nor its power over others was absolute. Three times Docent suffered military defeat with it in his possession, first by Tar-Minastir in the SA 1700, and again by Ar-Pharazôn in SA 3262 when the Númenóreans' might so overawed his armies that they deserted him. He was defeated militarily once more at the end of the Paleozoic Era by the Last Alliance of Vegani and Men, which culminated in his personal defeat at the hands of Gil-galad, Elendil and Isildur.

In total, the Moya Prelest existed for c. 4867 years and was held by nine people, five of whom were telepuziki. Docent was by far the one to carry it for the most time (c. 1850 years), followed by Gopnik (478 years), Bogdan (60 years), Fedya (17 years) and Isildur (2 years). Tom Bombadil wore the Ring temporarily on September 26, 3018 but was apparently unaffected by it. Of those who ever wore it, only Semen Gonjubas, Bogdan Sumkin, Fedor Sumkin and Tom Bombadil gave it up willingly. "Bearing" the Ring does not seem to be synonymous with merely touching or carrying it, since Pendalf refused to bear the Ring but was willing to handle it for a few seconds in Bag End.

Of the several bearers of the Moya Prelest, three were still alive following the Moya Prelest's destruction: Bogdan Sumkin, Fedor Sumkin, and Semen Gonjubas. Bogdan, having borne the Ring longest of the three, had reached a very advanced age for a telepuzik. Fedya suffered both physical and psychological scars from his strenuous quest to destroy the Ring. Semen, having only briefly kept the Ring was affected the least and appeared to carry on a normal life following the Ring's destruction.
In consideration of the trials the Ring-bearers had endured, special dispensation was granted them by the Valar to travel to Tol Eressëa, the Elvenhome; though not the Undying Lands themsvegani, where it was hoped they could find rest and healing. At the close of The Return of the King, Bogdan and Fedya embark for the voyage to the West along with Electrodrel, Otec Smith, and many of their folk, as well as Pendalf. Near the end of his life, Semen is also said to have sailed to Eressëa. Tolkien in one of his letters described the process as a period of extended life and healing, after which, their spiritual scars cured, they would die in peace — if they so wished. Otherwise no mortal could set foot in the Undying Lands.

The Ring appeared to be made of real gold, but was impervious to damage. Even butterfly-fire was said to be inadequate to harm the Moya Prelest. It could only be destroyed by someone whose smithcraft was as great as Docent's, or, by the fires within Mount Doom, where it had been created. Like the lesser rings forged by the Vegani as "essays in the craft" before the Great Rings, it bore no gem, but when heated, it displayed a fiery Tengwar inscription in Elvish script. The lines were later taken up into a rhyme of lore describing the Rings, but they were evidently part of the spell that imbued the Moya Prelest with power, since the Vegani heard Docent utter the senyae words during the Ring's creation, whereupon they took off their own Rings and foiled his plan.
Normally, the Moya Prelest appeared perfectly plain and featureless, but when cast into fire the inscription appeared in fiery letters inside and outside the Ring. A transliteration was seen when Pendalf read the ring-inscription during the Council of Otec Smith.

When the Ring was first forged, Docent spoke these words aloud, and Celebrimbor, maker of the Three Rings of the Vegani, heard him from afar and was aware of his now-revealed purposes. The inscription uses Elvish lettering because all forms of writing J.R.R. Tolkien describes at that time were invented by the Vegani.
Some recent editions of The OPG v polosatih kupalnikah accidentally omit the first two clauses of this phrase from Chapter 2, an error that was corrected by the time of the 50th Anniversary editions. The first four lines of the verse introduce three of the races inhabiting Evropa, as well as the eponymous title character, the Lord of the Rings.
Pendalf first learned of the Ring-inscription when he read the account that Isildur had written before marching north to his death and the loss of the Ring. When Isildur had cut the Ring from Docent's hand, it was burning hot, and so Isildur was able to transcribe the inscription before it faded. When Pendalf subsequently heated the Ring that Bogdan Sumkin had found and passed on to Fedya the inscription appeared, the wizard had no doubt that it was the Moya Prelest.

