Aragorn, son of Arathorn II and Gilraen, also known as Strider and Elessar, was the 16th and last Chieftain of the Dúnedain of the North; later crowned King Elessar Telcontar (March 1, 2931 - FO 120), the 26th King of Arnor, 35th King of Gondor and first High King of Gondor and Arnor since the short reign of Isildur. He was a great ranger and warrior, and bore, as Isildur's heir, the shards of Narsil, reforged and renamed Andúril ("Flame of the West") in the War of the Ring.
Aragorn was a descendant of Elros Tar-Minyatur through the line of the Lords of Andúnië to Elendil, High King of Arnor and Gondor. Like all of the kings before him, he was Elrond's kin through the House of Elros. His ancestor Arvedui was wedded to Fíriel, descended from Anárion, who bore their son Aranarth, making Aragorn the last descendant of both Isildur and Anárion.
When he was only two years old, his father Arathorn was killed while pursuing Orcs. Aragorn was afterwards fostered in Rivendell by Elrond. At the request of his mother, his lineage was kept secret, as she feared he would be killed like his father and grandfather if his true identity as the descendant of Elendil and Heir of Isildur became known. Aragorn was renamed "Estel" and was not told about his heritage until 2951.
Elrond revealed to "Estel" his true name and ancestry when he was twenty, giving him the Ring of Barahir and the Shards of Narsil, but withholding the Sceptre of Annúminas from Aragorn until he "came of the right" to possess the item. It was also around this time that Aragorn met and fell in love with Arwen, Elrond's daughter, newly returned from her mother's homeland of Lothlórien where she had been visiting her grandmother Galadriel.
Aragorn thereafter assumed his proper role as the sixteenth Chieftain of the Dúnedain and left the comforts of Rivendell for the wild, where he lived with the remainder of his people, the Rangers of the North, whose kingdom had been destroyed through division and the Angmar Wars centuries before.
Aragorn met Gandalf the Grey in 2956 and they became close friends. Heeding Gandalf's advice, Aragorn and the Rangers began to guard a small land known as the Shire inhabited by the diminutive and agrarian Hobbits, and he became known among the peoples just outside the Shire's borders as Strider.
From TA 2957 to TA 2980, Aragorn undertook great journeys, serving in the armies of King Thengel of Rohan, and Steward Ecthelion II of Gondor. Many of his tasks helped to raise morale in the West and counter the growing threat of Sauron and his allies, and he earned priceless experience which he would later put to use in the War of the Ring. Aragorn served these lords in disguise and his name in Gondor and Rohan during that time was Thorongil ("Eagle of the Star"). With a small squadron of ships from Gondor, he led an assault on the long-standing City of the Corsairs in 2980, burning many of the Corsairs' ships and personally overthrowing the Captain of the Haven during a battle upon the quays. After the victory at Umbar, "Thorongil" left Gondor and, to the dismay of his men, went east.
Later in 2980, he visited Lothlórien, and there once again met Arwen. He gave her the heirloom of his House, the Ring of Barahir, and, on the hill of Cerin Amroth, Arwen pledged her hand to him in marriage, renouncing her Elvish lineage and accepting the Gift of Ilúvatar: Death.
Elrond withheld from Aragorn permission to marry his daughter until such a time as his foster son should be king of "both" Gondor and Arnor. As both Elrond and Aragorn knew, to marry a mortal, Arwen would be required to choose mortality, and thus deprive the deathless Elrond of his daughter while the world lasted. Elrond was also concerned for Arwen's own happiness, fearing that in the end she might find death (her own and that of her beloved) too difficult to bear.
Before the events of The Lord of the Rings properly take place, Aragorn traveled widely through Middle-earth, entering the Dwarven mines of Moria via the East-gate of Moria but exiting the same way. He also journeyed to Harad, where (in his own words) "the stars are strange". Tolkien indicated that these travels occurred after TA 2980, but does not indicate what happened during Aragorn's visits.
In TA 3009, Gandalf grew suspicious of the origin of the Ring belonging to the Hobbit Bilbo Baggins, which later turned out to be the One Ring, the key to the Dark Lord Sauron's power. Setting a guard of Rangers on the Shire, Aragorn went at Gandalf's request into Rhovanion in search of Gollum, who had once possessed the Ring. He caught the creature in the Dead Marshes near Mordor, and brought him as a captive to Thranduil's Halls in Mirkwood, where Gandalf questioned him. Gollum, however, escaped some time later with the aid of Sauron's Orcs.

Aragorn returned with Gandalf in the spring of TA 3018, and then went away on his own journey, and was not able to help when Gandalf discovered the Nazgûl were seeking for Frodo and the Ring in the Shire. After Frodo left Hobbiton, Gildor Inglorion informed Aragorn that the Nine were looking for him and Gandalf was missing. Aragorn continued to watch the Great East Road until Tom Bombadil and the four hobbits came from the Barrow-downs. Following them to Bree, he met Frodo at the Inn of the Prancing Pony under the name "Strider," as the Men of Bree called him. Though originally the hobbits were suspicious of him, Barliman Butterbur brought a letter from Gandalf that made them trust him. Aragorn was aged 87 at that time, nearing the prime of life for one of royal Númenórean descent.
After the raid on Bree, Aragorn led the Hobbits out of Bree-land and through the Midgewater Marshes. While there, he saw Gandalf's battle with the Nazgûl on Weathertop from a distance. When they themselves came to Weathertop, they discovered five of the Nazgûl had followed them, and during the later attack he fought off the Ringwraiths. After attempting to heal Frodo with athelas, he led them across the Lone-lands towards the Trollshaws. They met with the Elf-lord Glorfindel who led them to the Ford of Bruinen. When the Nazgûl caught up with them and Elrond released a flood, Aragorn and the Hobbits kindled fire and flushed out those Nazgûl that had remained on the western bank. He then accompanied Frodo to Rivendell.
During the feast of victory, Aragorn was gathering news from Elladan and Elrohir, and later helped his friend Bilbo compose his Lay of Eärendil. During the Council of Elrond, he revealed himself to Boromir as the heir of Isildur and described his capture of Gollum. After Elrond decided that the Ring must be destroyed in Mordor, Frodo took the burden upon himself. There, Aragorn chose to join Frodo, thus forming the Fellowship of the Ring, tasked with accompanying Frodo in destroying the Ring in the fires of Mount Doom. Besides Aragorn, Gandalf, and Frodo, the company included Frodo's cousins Pippin and Merry, his best friend Samwise Gamgee, Legolas the Elf, Gimli the Dwarf, and Boromir of Gondor.

Aragorn and Gandalf had been planning their journey to Mordor for weeks. He and Gandalf guided the Fellowship south along the line of the Misty Mountains. When they came to Hollin, Aragorn grew suspicious due to the lack of any sound he heard and spotted the Crebain who were spying out the land for Saruman. He then convinced Gandalf to try the pass over Caradhras. However, while they were still far down the mountain, they were caught in a freak storm brought on by Sauron, and were forced to retreat. Aragorn, together with Boromir, made a path through the snow for the Fellowship to escape.
After it was proposed to go through Moria, Aragorn reluctantly agreed to go and helped fight off the Wargs that attacked them during the night. Helping to rescue Frodo from the Watcher in the Water, once the company entered Moria, Aragorn remained at the back and noticed Gollum beginning to follow them. After they were attacked in the Chamber of Mazarbul, Aragorn fought off the attackers and killed the Orc-Chieftain, (or Cave-troll in the movies) that had seemingly killed Frodo. During Gandalf's battle with the Balrog on the Bridge of Khazad-dûm, Aragorn ran to his side and became the Fellowship's leader after Gandalf fell, presumed dead. Aragorn then led the company to Lothlórien, where he visited Cerin Amroth for the last time. At their parting, Lady Galadriel gave him the Elfstone.
After Lórien, Aragorn and the Fellowship sailed down the River Anduin to the Falls of Rauros. Aragorn attempted to catch Gollum several times. Though his original plan was to set out for Gondor and aid its people in the war, he felt responsible for Frodo after the loss of Gandalf and was conflicted about what path to take.

After passing the Argonath, the Fellowship camped at Parth Galen. Frodo saw that Boromir had been driven mad by the influence of the One Ring, trying to take it. Frodo put the Ring on, rendering him invisible, and ran away from Boromir. Frodo climbed to the high seat on Amon Hen; from there he could see Sauron's eye looking for him. The Hobbit felt the eye but the Dark Lord was distracted by Gandalf the White.
At this same time, the others were attacked by Saruman's Uruk-hai and a battle ensued. During the ensuing battle, Boromir was killed defending Merry and Pippin, expressing his remorse privately to Aragorn for trying to take the Ring. After discovering that Frodo had left, Aragorn and the others decided that they would leave Frodo and Sam to rescue Merry and Pippin. Legolas, Gimli, and Aragorn put Boromir's body and war gear in one of the Elven boats as a funeral boat and tribute to Boromir for his bravery and courage. His body would be sent over the Falls of Rauros.
While Frodo continued his quest with Samwise Gamgee, Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli went to Rohan to free Merry and Pippin, who had been captured by the Uruk-hai in Saruman's service.

Aragorn ran from Parth Galen across the width of Rohan in just four days. As they approached Fangorn Forest, the "Three Hunters" Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli encountered Éomer, who had recently pursued and routed an Orc-band in the area. From Éomer, Aragorn learned that the Orcs who had kidnapped Merry and Pippin had been destroyed and that the Hobbits had not been found. Dejected, he led Legolas and Gimli to the site of the battle. Clues led Aragorn to believe that the Hobbits might still be alive, and he led the Three Hunters into Fangorn Forest. They did not find the Hobbits, but they did find Gandalf the White, sent back to continue his struggle against Sauron. Gandalf told the Three Hunters that the Hobbits were safe with the Ents of Fangorn.
Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli then helped the people of Rohan in the Battle of the Hornburg, in which they conclusively defeated Saruman's army. Afterward Aragorn went with Gandalf to Isengard, only to find it in ruins by the work of the Ents. Aragorn, being present with Gandalf, Théoden, Éomer, Legolas and Gimli, negotiated in a final parley with Saruman. Saruman attempted to bend Théoden to his will, and at first the king was almost swayed, but mastering his will he refused to join with Saruman. Saruman also attempted to sway Gandalf, but failed in this also, and even so Gandalf offered his counterpart the opportunity for forgiveness. Saruman refused to repent out of pride and to avoid seeming a rebel to Sauron, and thus Gandalf broke Saruman's staff and banished him from the Order of Wizards and the White Council. After Saruman crawled away, Gríma Wormtongue threw the palantír of Orthanc at Gandalf as he and the others were leaving. He missed, however, unable to decide if he hated Saruman or Gandalf more, and thus ended the Battle of the Hornburg and the destruction of Isengard. After Pippin revealed himself to Sauron in the stone, Gandalf gave the palantír to Aragorn.
Not long after the Grey Company of Rangers arrived from the north, dispatched by Galadriel. With them rode Elladan and Elrohir and Halbarad, bearing a standard made for him by Arwen. When Aragorn returned to Helms Deep, he decided to draw Sauron out and used the palantír to show himself and Andúril to the Dark Lord, wrenching the Stone to his will after a long struggle with the Dark Lord. However, this led Sauron to swiftly send out the forces he had long prepared to attack Minas Tirith.

In order to defend the city, Aragorn travelled the Paths of the Dead, and summoned the Dead Men of Dunharrow who owed allegiance to the Heir of Isildur. It had been prophesied by Isildur and Malbeth the Seer that the Dead would be summoned once more to pay their debt for betraying Gondor an age before. With their aid the Corsairs of Umbar were defeated at the Battle of Pelargir.
Aragorn, a small force of Rangers, and a large contingent of men and soldiers from the southern regions then sailed up the Anduin to Minas Tirith. When they arrived at the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, Aragorn unfurled a standard that Arwen had made for him which showed both the White Tree of Gondor along with the jeweled crown and seven stars of the House of Elendil. With the help of the southern forces the armies of Gondor and Rohan rallied together and defeated Sauron's army.
The Steward Denethor II declared that he would not bow to a descendant of Isildur (years before, he had seen "Thorongil" as a rival to his father's favor and soon discovered his true identity) and burned himself to death during the battle, despairing of final victory. Aragorn healed Faramir, Denethor's last heir, Éowyn and Merry, who together slew the Witch-king as well as many others. This won him the immediate recognition of Faramir as rightful heir to the throne; his humility and self-sacrifice gained him the hearts of the inhabitants of Gondor's capital city. Aragorn's healing abilities, moreover, were a sign to the people of Gondor of the identity of their true king; as Ioreth said, "The hands of the King are the hands of a healer, and so shall the rightful king be known." The people hailed him as King that same evening.
Despite his immediate success and popularity, however, and despite his claim to the throne through raising the royal banner, Aragorn decided to lay aside his claim for the time being. He knew that if he aggressively promoted his claim, rival claimants or debates as to his legitimacy were not out of the question, and this could be a fatal distraction for Gondor at a time when the West needed to be united against Sauron. So, to avoid conflict, after he had healed people during the following nights of March 15–16, he left Minas Tirith and symbolically refused to enter it again until he was crowned King on May 1.

Aragorn then led the Host of the West to Mordor as per the advice of Gandalf and Elrond, to divert Sauron's attention from Frodo and Sam. They marched over the Anduin river and came to Minas Morgul, and set fire to the fields there. Leaving a guard at the Cross-roads of the Fallen King, they began to march north along the North Road of Ithilien, and Aragorn won a skirmish against some Orcs and Easterlings that tried to ambush them. They then reached the desert before Mordor, and Aragorn allowed those who were afraid to depart to retake Cair Andros. The Army of the West then reached the Black Gate, and Aragorn along with Gandalf, Éomer, Imrahil, Pippin, Legolas and Gimli rode up to it and called for Sauron to come forth. He then watched as the Mouth of Sauron revealed Sauron knew about Frodo and Sam, and saw Gandalf's rejection of Sauron's terms. The Host of the West was then encircled by Sauron's forces, a vast army of Orcs and Men. Aragorn then arranged the Army of the West defensively on two Slag-hills and the Battle of the Morannon began.
After the destruction of the Ring and the defeat of Sauron, Aragorn freed the slaves of Núrn and gifted them the entire land in southern Mordor.
As King of Reunited Gondor and Arnor
Then Faramir stood up and spoke in a clear voice: “Men of Gondor, hear now the Steward of this Realm! Behold! One has come to claim the kingship again at last. Here is Aragorn, son of Arathorn, chieftain of the Dúnedain of Arnor, Captain of the Host of the West, bearer of the Star of the North, wielder of the Sword Reforged, victorious in battle, whose hands bring healing, the Elfstone, Elessar of the line of Valandil, Isildur's son, Elendil's son of Númenor. Shall he be king and enter into the City and dwell there?" And all the host and all the people cried yea with one voice.
—Faramir the Steward announces the coronation of King Elessar
Upon Sauron's defeat, Aragorn was crowned as King Elessar, a name given to him by Galadriel and adopted by the people of Gondor because of the Elfstone he wore. He became the twenty-sixth King of Arnor, thirty-fifth King of Gondor, and the first High King of the Reunited Kingdom, though it would be several years before his authority was firmly re-established in Arnor. His line was referred to as the House of Telcontar (Telcontar being Quenya for "Strider"). Aragorn married Arwen shortly afterwards, and ruled the Kingdom of Gondor and Arnor until 120 of the Fourth Age. His reign was marked by great harmony and prosperity within Gondor and Arnor, and by a great renewal of cooperation and communication among Men, Elves, and Dwarves, fostered by his vigorous rebuilding campaign following the war. Aragorn led the forces of the Reunited Kingdom on military campaigns against some Easterlings and Haradrim, re-establishing rule over all the territory that Gondor had lost in previous centuries.
During his coronation, Aragorn spoke Elendil's Oath: "Et Eärello Endorenna utúlien. Sinome maruvan ar Hildinyar tenn' Ambar-metta!" ("Out of the Great Sea to Middle-earth I am come. In this place, I will abide, and my heirs, unto the ending of the world.")

Then a great beauty was revealed in him, so that all who after came there looked on him in wonder; for they saw that the grace of his youth, and the valour of his manhood, and the wisdom and majesty of his age were blended together. And long there he lay, an image of the Kings of Men in glory undimmed before the breaking of the world.
— Description of Aragorn's death.
When in the year 120 of the Fourth Age, King Elessar realised his days were at an end, he went to the House of the Kings in the Silent Street. He said farewell to his son Eldarion and his daughters and gave Eldarion his crown and sceptre. Arwen remained at Aragorn's side until he died. A year after Aragorn's death, Arwen died in Lothlórien of a broken heart. Eldarion began his reign as the second King of the Reunited Kingdom after his father's death.

Tolkien gives this description of Aragorn in The Lord of the Rings: lean, dark, tall, with "a shaggy head of dark hair flecked with grey, and in a pale stern face a pair of keen grey eyes."
In The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen, he was said to be often grim and sad, with unexpected moments of levity. Some time after the publications of the books, Tolkien wrote that he was six feet six inches tall.
Aragorn possessed Elven wisdom due to his childhood in Rivendell with Elrond and the foresight of the Dúnedain. He was also a skilled healer, notably with the plant Athelas (also known as Kingsfoil). He was also a mighty warrior and an unmatched commander; after the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, he, Éomer, and Imrahil were said to be left unscathed, even though they had been in the thick of the fighting.
Though there is no indication of his ever doubting his role and destiny as the future king of the Reunited Kingdom and one of the leaders of the war against Sauron (as he did in Peter Jackson's film), he was not immune to self-doubt, as he doubted the wisdom of his decisions while leading the Fellowship after the loss of Gandalf in Moria, and blamed himself for many of their subsequent misfortunes.
On one occasion his reverential pride for his heritage as caused complications as he refused to disarm and leave his sword Andúril at the door of Edoras as Théoden had required. Aragorn even vocally questioned how the authority of Théoden could supersede his own lineage from that of Elendil. Aragron only acquiesced after Gandalf called out his hubris as only benefiting their enemies well as highlighting that he would surrender his own sword if it meant meeting Théoden. Even so, Aragorn swore that death would come somehow to anyone else that touched it.
He also appeared to possess a nigh-indomitable will. At one point, he was able to psychically challenge Sauron for control of the palantír of Orthanc, and proved victorious in that struggle. It should be noted that even Gandalf the White was reluctant to use the palantír for fear of challenging Sauron directly and revealing himself to the Dark Lord. His fortitude in the face of the Dead Men of Dunharrow was unwavering and his companions remarked that he was mighty indeed in the strength of his will. He was accounted as "the hardiest of living Men" during his lifetime.