Arwen was the Half-elven daughter of Elrond and Celebrían. She was often called Arwen Undómiel or "Evenstar".
In marrying Aragorn after the War of the Ring, she became Queen of the Reunited Kingdom of Arnor and Gondor, and like Beren and Lúthien before her, she united Elf and Man in peace, while becoming mortal.

Arwen was born in TA 241, to Lord Elrond and Lady Celebrían of Rivendell. Like her father and brothers, she had the right to choose between immortality or mortal life. She lived most of her life in Rivendell and Lothlórien interchangeably.

During Aragorn's twentieth year, he met Arwen for the first time in Rivendell, where he lived under Elrond's protection. Arwen, then over 2700 years old, had recently returned to her father's home after living for a while with her grandmother Galadriel in Lórien. Aragorn fell in love with Arwen at first sight, and at first mistook her for Lúthien, thinking he had fallen into a dream.
About thirty years later, the two were reunited in Lórien, where Arwen reciprocated Aragorn's love and they "plighted their troth" (promised themselves to each other) on the mound of Cerin Amroth, Arwen choosing to become mortal and to stay in Middle-earth with Aragorn, and giving up the chance to sail over the sea and live forever in the Blessed Realm. Elrond would, however, not permit the two to marry until Aragorn had taken the thrones of Arnor and Gondor, the price for Arwen's abandonment of immortality. Arwen never broke faith with Aragorn, even when he went to war. While the War in the South raged on, Arwen wove a banner for Aragorn, which would become his standard after he became king.
Before taking the Paths of the Dead, Aragorn was met by the Grey Company, consisting of Rangers of the North, and Arwen's brothers, Elladan and Elrohir. They brought to him a banner of black cloth: the gift made by Arwen, and a sign that encouraged him to take the difficult path. When the banner was unfurled at the Battle of the Pelennor Fields to reveal the emblems of Elendil in mithril, gems, and gold, it was the first triumphant announcement of the King's return.

Arwen arrived at Minas Tirith after Aragorn had become King of Gondor and Arnor, and they married on Midsummer's Day in the year TA 3019, after the end of the War of the Ring. She became Queen of the Reunited Kingdom. After marrying Aragorn, she bestowed upon Frodo Baggins a gift; her place on the ships to Valinor. She bore Aragorn's son, Eldarion, and several unnamed daughters, some time in the Fourth Age.

In the year 121 of the Fourth Age, one year after Aragorn's death, Arwen died of a broken heart at Cerin Amroth in Lórien and was buried there. She was 2901 years old and had been wed to Aragorn for 122 years.