Faramir was the second son of Denethor II and younger brother of Boromir. He was Captain of the Rangers of Ithilien and Captain of the White Tower upon his brother's death.
After the War of the Ring, Faramir became the first Prince of Ithilien and married Éowyn of Rohan.

Faramir was born in the year TA 2983 to Denethor II and Finduilas, daughter of Adrahil of Dol Amroth. The following year, his grandfather Ecthelion II died and his father, Denethor, succeeded him as the Ruling Steward of Gondor.
When Faramir was five years old, Finduilas died. Her death caused Denethor to become detached from his family. The relationship between Faramir and Boromir, who was five years older, grew much closer and greater in love. Although the siblings were very similar in appearance with their dark hair and grey eyes, it was not so in personality. Boromir was defined to be the more daring one, as well as the more fearless and strong warrior. Faramir’s boldness was incorrectly judged less due to his gentle nature and love of lore and music. Despite the obvious way that Denethor favored Boromir over Faramir, and their significant differences in personality, there was never any jealousy or rivalry between the brothers. Boromir always protected and helped Faramir, and Faramir in turn greatly admired his older brother.
It was this interest that formed a friendship between Faramir and Gandalf the Grey. The youngest son of Denethor learned of what he could from Gandalf’s wisdom and mentoring. Denethor did not approve of Faramir as the "Wizard's pupil", for he neither trusted nor liked the Istar.
Faramir's leadership, skill-in-arms, and swift but hardy judgment proved handy on the battlefield. During the War of the Ring, he was the Captain of the Rangers of Ithilien, who often skirmished with allies of Sauron in that province. Faramir valiantly defended Gondor from the Enemy, but did not enjoy fighting for its own sake.

In June of 3018, Sauron's forces attacked Osgiliath under the command of the Witch-king, whose presence caused the soldiers to flee across the Anduin. When the last bridge was destroyed, Boromir and Faramir were upon it. With two others, they swam ashore and managed to drive the Orcs back from the Anduin's west shores.
It came to Faramir twice more, and once to his brother, and the brothers described it to Denethor, who only replied saying only that Imladris was an Elvish name for Rivendell, home of Elrond. Although Faramir had wanted to go for Gondor’s sake, Boromir decided to go instead, for he heard that the way was fraught with dark and danger. He also considered himself to be a better warrior that Faramir, and therefore more likely to survive the perilous journey. Although he encountered some resistance from Denethor, who did not wish for Gondor's finest captain to leave him in those dark times, Boromir still went. Boromir traveled for nearly four months to reach Rivendell, and although he lost his horse near Tharbad, he still arrived just in time for the Council of Elrond.
On February 29, 3019 at midnight, Faramir, who was on guard duty on the western shore in Osgiliath, waded down to a boat floating down the Anduin river. To his grief, it contained the dead body of his brother which was pierced with many wounds. In it lay his sword, broken, but there was no sign of the Great Horn, which he and his father had heard distantly blowing to the North three days prior.
During a battle with Southrons, Faramir, who had taken over his brother's position as the Captain of the White Tower, encountered the Hobbits Frodo Baggins and Samwise Gamgee, recognizing them to be the Halflings his dream spoke of. After the skirmish, Faramir questioned Frodo about his riddle and Isildur's Bane, but, realizing what he was talking about, quickly switched to the topic of Boromir's death and sought answers as to its circumstances. He then decided to take the pair to Henneth Annûn.
En route, Faramir continued questioning Frodo confidentially, and based on Frodo's answers and his own intuition determined that Frodo was carrying some great evil weapon of the Dark Lord of the Enemy. But rather than take it for himself or Gondor, he assured Frodo he would never use such as weapon.
Faramir ate with Frodo and Sam, and listened to Frodo's tales of their journey up to that point, and in turn told the Hobbits of Gondor's decline. During their discussion, Sam accidentally revealed Boromir's desire for the Enemy’s Ring, Isildur's Bane. Despite the hobbits’ fears, Faramir remained true to his vow, for he was wise enough to realize that such a weapon could not be used for good. With this knowledge, he also realized the peril his brother had faced.
On the very same night, Gollum was spotted fishing in the Forbidden Pool next to Henneth Annûn—an act punishable by death. However Faramir listened to Frodo’s pleas to spare Gollum’s life, and after interrogating the creature he decided that Frodo and Sam would be free in the Lands of Gondor and Gollum under Frodo's protection. Giving them provisions, he sent them on their way to continue their quest. At their parting, Faramir warned Frodo of Gollum's treacherous nature and that the path Gollum had proposed (Cirith Ungol) had an evil reputation of old.
Faramir and his company retreated to Cair Andros, an island in the River Anduin that guarded the northern approaches to Minas Tirith. After noting that the sky was now covered in complete darkness, Faramir sent his company south to reinforce the garrison at Osgiliath while he and three of his men rode to Minas Tirith directly. Along the way, they were pursued by the Nazgûl, riding Black Wings. The men, except Faramir, were unhorsed and it was the Captain, a master of both beasts and men, who was still horsed and rode back to aid the fallen. If Gandalf had not intervened, they would have surely perished.
Arriving at Minas Tirith, Faramir reported to Denethor and Gandalf of his encounter with Frodo and Sam. Denethor was angered that Faramir had not brought the Ring to Gondor, wishing that he and his brother’s places had been reversed, since Denethor believed that Boromir would have brought the Enemy’s weapon to him.
Denethor sent his remaining son to hold Western Osgiliath against the hosts of the Enemy that outnumbered their own greatly. Although Faramir disagreed with his father’s strategy, he agreed to go.
After a day of fighting the Witch-king's army overwhelmed the men of Gondor and won Osgiliath. Faramir drew back to the Causeway Forts, the defence of which lasted another day, with many of the defenders being wounded or killed. Faramir decided to stay with the rear guard in order to make sure that the retreat over Pelennor Fields would not turn into a rout. As the force neared Minas Tirith it was overtaken by Orcs and Haradrim and Faramir was gravely wounded by a poisonous arrow. Fortunately, Gandalf and Faramir's uncle, Prince Imrahil of Dol Amroth, led a cavalry sortie that successfully covered the retreat. Imrahil bore Faramir back to Denethor, telling him that his son had done great deeds.
Regretting that he had thanklessly sent his son off in needless peril without his blessing, Denethor, after looking in the palantír, believed that the Ring was captured and the end was near. Thus he ordered his servants to build a funeral pyre for him and his son. Despite the protests of the Hobbit, Peregrin Took (serving the Steward in payment of Boromir's death) that Faramir was still alive, Denethor continued with his plans and released the Hobbit from his service.
Horrified, Pippin went to alert Gandalf and Beregond, one of the Tower Guards. Beregond, who loved his captain enough to abandon his post and risk his life protecting him, stopped the servants from lighting the pyre, killing several. Pippin returned with Gandalf, who intervened by taking Faramir off the pyre as Faramir moaned out to his father in his fevered dreams. Denethor took out a knife, trying to take Faramir back, but Beregond placed himself in front of Faramir. Seeing that he could not win, Denethor lit the pyre and laid himself down upon it, burning himself alive.

Then, Faramir was laid in the Houses of Healing. His wound from the Haradrim arrow, along with weariness and grief concerning his constantly strained relationship with his father and the Black Breath of the Nazgûl (who had hunted Faramir ever since he had left Ithilien), all contributed to his near-death. After the battle, Aragorn came and revived him with athelas. When he awoke, Faramir immediately recognized Aragorn as his rightful king.
Before Aragorn left to lead the soldiers to the Black Gate, he commanded the Warden of the Houses of Healing to have Faramir and Éowyn to remain resting for at least ten days. After Éowyn demanded that the Warden take her to the Steward of the City to have her released so she could ride out in battle, Faramir, whose heart was moved with pity and pierced by her beauty, told Éowyn that he too, had to heed the advice of the Warden. He fulfilled her request to have her room look east to Mordor and asked her to talk with him at times.
Faramir and Éowyn walked together in the gardens nearly every day, and he learned from Merry Brandybuck of Éowyn's despair of feeling trapped, waiting on the waning of Théoden, and of Aragorn's rejection of her love.
On March 25, Faramir gave Éowyn a dark blue mantle sewn with silver stars that had once belonged to his mother Finduilas, as they stood at the wall that looked towards Mordor. There, they saw a threatening darkness towering over and seeing this, Faramir told her of his dream of the Downfall of Númenor and that the darkness threatening to overtake Middle-earth reminded him of the great wave that swallowed the island. Somehow, to Faramir and the people of the city, a hope and joy welled in their hearts and he kissed Éowyn’s brow. They were later informed by an eagle that Sauron had fallen for good, and that Aragorn would return as king.
Éowyn, however, still felt languished and unfulfilled. Several days after he gave her the mantle, Faramir told her that he understood that she desired to be lifted in greatness and out of the cage she had felt trapped in, and when Aragorn only gave her understanding and pity, instead of love, she had wanted to die valiantly and gloriously in battle. He told her that though he had first pitied her, he now loved her. There, Éowyn’s grief was fully healed, and no longer did she desire glory or greatness and realized that she had come to love Faramir in return.
Faramir briefly served as the Ruling Steward of Gondor, and began preparing the city for the King's arrival. On the day of the King’s official coronation on May 1, Faramir surrendered his office, which was represented by the white rod of the Steward, kneeling as he did so. Aragorn however, gave the rod back, announcing that as long as his line would last, Faramir and his descendants would be Stewards of Gondor. After Faramir had asked the people of Gondor if they accepted Aragorn as their King (which they did), Faramir took the Crown of Gondor out and Aragorn was crowned King Elessar by Gandalf.

King Elessar appointed Faramir as the Prince of Ithilien, and Beregond to be the Captain of his guard, the White Company. As Prince of Ithilien, he and the Prince of Dol Amroth, Gondor's two highest-ranking nobles, became King Elessar's chief commanders. His duties also included acting as resident march-warden of Gondor's main eastward outpost, rehabilitating the lost territories, as well as clearing it of outlaws and Orcs and cleansing the Morgul Vale of evil remnants. Faramir also fulfilled the traditional role as Steward, acting as the King’s chief counsellor as well as ruling Gondor in the King's absence.
After the funeral of Théoden, Faramir married Éowyn in Edoras. After their marriage, the two settled in Emyn Arnen, where they had at least one son, named Elboron. Elboron would succeed Faramir as Steward of Gondor, Prince of Ithilien, and Lord of Emyn Arnen, after Faramir's death in FO 82. Faramir lived to be 120 years old, becoming the first Steward since Belecthor II to pass 100, as by a quirk, the blood of Númenor ran true in him. One of his grandsons, Barahir, wrote the Tale of Aragorn and Arwen.