Sauron, the eponymous Lord of the Rings, was the greatest fallen Maia, a former renowned disciple of Aulë, the chief agent of the first Dark Lord Morgoth in the Elder Days (First Age), the second Dark Lord, the maker of the One Ring, and self-proclaimed ruler of the Middle-earth in the Second Age and near the end of the Third Age.
In the Days before days, Sauron was corrupted by Melkor (later named Morgoth) to betray the Valar and serve him. He served as Morgoth's chief lieutenant throughout the First Age. After Morgoth's ousting by the Valar at the end of the First Age, Sauron went into hiding out of pride and shame. To the Sindar of Beleriand, Sauron was known as Gorthaur in the First Age.
Sauron returned to Middle-earth about 500 years into the Second Age, becoming the second Dark Lord and plotting to conquer Middle-earth as his former master had. After deceiving the Elves into making the Rings of Power, Sauron deceitfully forged the One Ring, which he intended to use to control all other Rings as part of his plot to bend the wills of everyone else to his. From then, he grew in power significantly.
After acknowledging the might of the Númenóreans at the end of the Second Age, Sauron caused the Downfall of Númenor, but was eventually defeated in the War of the Last Alliance of Elves and Men united under Gil-galad and Elendil. In the final battle, Isildur cut the One Ring from Sauron's hand, destroying his corporeal form and robbing him of much of his power. Then, after centuries of lying dormant and regaining strength, Sauron returned openly to power late in the Third Age and again strove to dominate Middle-earth. Ultimately, however, the One Ring was destroyed for good after being cast into the fires of Mount Doom, which not only cost him all his power, but also caused him to become a permanent shadow, who had no chance to take form or gain any power ever again.

Sauron's original name was Mairon. He was the mightiest Maia of the Vala Aulë the Smith, and learned much from Aulë of smithing and handiwork, becoming a great craftsman and "mighty in the lore of" Aulë's people. He was among the most powerful Maiar overall.
In the Days before days, Mairon was as Eru had created him: good and noble. His greatest virtue was his love of order and perfection, and dislike of anything wasteful.[citation needed] However, this would also prove to be the cause of his betrayal and downfall, as Mairon saw in Melkor the will and power that would help him achieve his personal ends quicker than if he pursued them alone. However, while Melkor wanted to either control or destroy Middle-earth itself, Mairon's desire was to dominate the minds and wills of its creatures for what he perceived to be their own benefit. To see his marvelous designs through, Mairon sought to increase his innate power, so he betrayed the Valar and joined Melkor, soon becoming his chief agent.
After allying himself with Melkor, Mairon feigned loyalty to the Valar, which allowed him to secretly inform his master of his dealings with them. When Melkor established his strongholds in Middle-earth, Mairon left Valinor and openly declared his allegiance, becoming a recognized foe of the Valar.

As Melkor's lieutenant, Sauron commanded the fortress of Angband. It was with Sauron's aid that Melkor was able to breed Orcs, in mockery of the Children of Ilúvatar. At the beginning of the Battle of the Powers, Sauron feigned a resistance against the Valar at Angband, thus allowing Melkor to muster forces at Utumno unnoticed. After both Angband and Utumno were sacked and Melkor captured, Sauron was not found; in their haste to both capture the first Dark Lord and remove him from Middle-earth, the Valar overlooked Sauron's escape.
Sauron "controlled things" in Melkor's absence: Angband's reconstruction began, and the Orcs there multiplied under his command. Possibly aware of the Great March, Sauron may have harried the Elves on their journey, directing Melkor's servants abroad or affecting the weather. The Sindar Elves in Beleriand called him Gorthaur, meaning "dread abomination", while others of the Eldar had named him Sauron, meaning "the abhorred" or "the abominable" (a mockery of his original name). Under Sauron's regency, Angband was almost ready by YT 1495, with Orc armies already prepared by him when Melkor returned.
Towards the end of the First Age, the Ñoldor Elves left the Blessed Realm of Valinor in the Utter West (against the counsel of the Valar) in order to wage war on Melkor (who they named Morgoth) following his theft of the Silmarils of Fëanor, enchanted gems that glowed with light from the now-destroyed Two Trees of Valinor. In that war, Sauron was counted as the "greatest of [Morgoth's[ servants that have names" and was soon feared as a lord of phantoms and dreadful beasts, a shape-shifter and sorcerer.
When Morgoth left Angband much later to corrupt the newly awakened Atani (Men), Sauron directed the war against the Elves. Commanding "a host of Balrogs" by one account, he seized the Elvish isle of Tol Sirion from its warden, Orodreth, and turned it into Tol-in-Gaurhoth, the Isle of werewolves. There he established himself as the Lord of werewolves, with both Draugluin, sire of the werewolves, and Thuringwethil, a Vampire herald, at his side.
After the Dagor Bragollach in FA 456, Sauron was bidden by Morgoth to destroy Barahir, ally of Finrod, King of Nargothrond; Sauron ensnared Gorlim, who was captured by his hunters, and interrogated him about the outlaw-lord's location. Gorlim refused to tell them anything, even under torture, until Sauron himself came forth and bartered with the man. Gorlim asked for his wife Eilinel, whom he thought captured. Thus, Sauron agreed and Gorlim yielded the information. However, Morgoth's agent then revealed that Eilinel was dead, and he put Gorlim to death afterward. Sauron then sent Gorgol the Butcher's horde to slay Barahir and his company. Barahir's son, Beren, evaded this fate and after news of his deeds reached Morgoth. Sauron at the helm of an army of Orcs, werewolves and other fell beasts started hunting him.
In the Quest for the Silmaril, Beren and Finrod were captured by Sauron when they tried to sneak past Tol-in-Gaurgoth in Orc disguises. Sauron then defeated Finrod in a duel with songs of power, as told in The Lay of Leithian. Striping them of their stolen garb, he cast them into the dungeons where Werewolves devoured their companions; Morgoth's vassal hoped to terrify them into revealing their quest. When one of Sauron's werewolves came to attack Beren, Finrod wrestled with and killed it, but died soon after of his injuries.
Soon afterward, Lúthien and Huan the wolfhound arrived at the bridge of Tol-in-Gaurhoth. Sauron sent his servants to capture Lúthien, but all were slain by Huan, including Draugluin, but he fled and told his master that Huan was there. Sauron was aware of the prophecy that stated that Huan could not be slain save by the greatest wolf that had ever lived. As such, Sauron took the form of a werewolf and resolved to kill Huan and capture Lúthien. His form was so monstrous that as he charged down the bridge even Huan was forced to spring aside. But Lúthien possessed the ability to cast spells of sleep, and had one such spell active upon her when Sauron attacked. Sauron was momentarily impacted by the spell as he lunged at her, and Huan took advantage of this brief distraction to leap upon Sauron.
In the end Huan took Sauron by the throat and subdued him, and though Sauron attempted to shapeshift into a serpent and escape, Huan's grip upon his throat was too strong. Lúthien demanded then that Sauron yield to her the tower and the isle. She knew that Huan could not kill Sauron; as a Maia he was immortal. But she knew as well that Sauron had built up a great deal of power in his corporeal form, and that if Huan destroyed it, that power would be lost. So she mocked him with the possibility of having to flee back to Angband, powerless and without a body, to endure the scorn of Morgoth. Ultimately, Sauron was not willing to endure such shame, and chose to surrender Tol-in-Gaurhoth to her rather than have his flesh destroyed. Huan released him and he fled in the form of a "vampire".
After his defeat by Lúthien, Sauron played little part in the events of the First Age (possibly hiding from Morgoth's scorn or wrath). After his former master was defeated and taken to Valinor in chains at the end of the First Age, Sauron approached the victorious Host of the West and pled with Eönwë for mercy. However, Eönwë did not have the authority to pardon a being of his own order, and commanded Sauron to return to Aman to be judged by the Valar. It is not known for certain whether Sauron was genuinely repentant, daunted by the Host's victory, or some combination of the two. Regardless however, Sauron's pride and fear ultimately won out and instead of returning to Valinor, he fled and hid in Middle-earth.

After remaining hidden and dormant for five centuries, Sauron began revealing himself once more. At first his wishes were those of a reformer: he fancied that, with "the Valar (including Melkor) having failed", he would reorganize and heal Middle-earth. But his pride became boundless and his lust for absolute power, initially only the means to a noble end, became the end itself, leafing to him going back to his evil deeds. He desired to be a god-king and to be worshipped by all rational creatures. Sauron's hatred for the Valar grew, regarding "the motives of Manwë as precisely the same as his own".
"A new shadow arises in the East. It is no tyranny of evil Men, as your son believes; but a servant of Morgoth is stirring, and evil things wake again. Each year it gains in strength, for most Men are ripe to its purpose."
By SA 1000, he had gathered power and established himself in the land of Mordor, in eastern Middle-earth, and began building the dreaded Barad-dûr near Mount Doom. He gathered to his service all the Orcs "scattered far and wide in the Northern world" were under his dominion, as well as Trolls and other creatures from the days of Morgoth; Sauron also gained the allegiance of certain races of Men such as the Easterlings, "of old corrupted by Morgoth", and the Haradrim by promising them plunder, wealth and power.
Although Sauron knew that Men were easier to sway, he sought to bring the Elves into his service, as they were far more powerful than any Men save the Númenóreans. By about SA 1500, Sauron deceptively put on a fair visage and called himself Annatar, the "Lord of Gifts". It is said that as Annatar he assumed the guise of an emissary of the Valar, ironically "anticipating the Istari".
He befriended the Elf smiths of Eregion including Celebrimbor, a descendant of Fëanor and the greatest living craftsman. Sauron would go on to counsel them in both new forms of metallurgy and magic. Not all the Elves trusted him, particularly Lady Galadriel, Elrond, and Gil-galad, High King of the Ñoldor. Some accounts say that he befriended the Elven smiths of Gwaith-i-Mírdain without the knowledge of Galadriel and Celeborn. In one version of the story, Sauron developed such a strong hold over Gwaith-i-Mírdain that he persuaded them to rebel against Galadriel and Celeborn which drove them to leave Eregion so he could work unopposed. Regardless, the smiths of Eregion gave themselves over to learning from him just as their ancestors had trusted and learned from Morgoth.
This is the Master-ring, the One Ring to rule them all. This is the One Ring that he lost many ages ago, to the great weakening of his power. He greatly desires it – but he must not get it.
—Gandalf the Grey, The Lord of the Rings, "The Shadow of the Past"
Eventually, Sauron gave the Elven smiths he worked with the knowledge and encouragement to forge magic Rings, which he infused with potent spells without their knowledge. These included the great Rings of Power while he deceitfully forged the One Ring in secret, to rule the Elvish rings. To ensure that the One Ring would control the other rings, he passed much of his power to it. Upon that ring Sauron wrote in Tengwar the Black Speech inscription,
However, as soon as he put on his Ring the Elves sensed his treachery, and removed their Rings and hid them. Having raised the fortress of Barad-dûr in Mordor in SA 1600, Sauron then prepared ninety years for open war; his gathering of armies was opposed by the two "powerful enemies behind his back" in the East and South. The Elves managed to hide the three greatest of the Rings from him, but the other sixteen Rings of Power were either captured by Sauron, destroyed, or lost. To the Dwarves he had given Seven, but to Men he had given Nine, knowing that they would be the easiest to corrupt.
Despite having given Rings to the greatest of the Dwarven rulers, whatever plans Sauron had devised for the Dwarves would not come to pass. For when Aulë had crafted the fathers of the Dwarves, he had made them exceedingly sturdy of both mind and body in order to resist the predations, both physical and spiritual, of Morgoth's dark servants. This proved to be exceedingly fortunate for the Dwarves, for the Dwarf-lords who received the Rings did not fade and could not be influenced by Sauron even while he wore the One Ring. However, the Dwarves did not escape Sauron's maleficence unscathed, for the Rings kindled in the hearts of those who possessed them an insatiable lust for gold. Though this would make many of the Dwarven kingdoms exceedingly prosperous for a time, the obsession of the Dwarven ring-bearers with gold would ultimately bring much grief to their race. As Sauron predicted however, all nine of the Men to whom he had given Rings fell under his sway and became the Nazgûl, his deadliest servants.
Having grown "'greater', effectively" than Morgoth at the end, Sauron conquered nearly all of Middle-earth, with only Gil-galad's realm of Lindon being safe from his grasp. At his height during the Accursed Years, became known as the Dark Lord to the Free Peoples. However, he had not expected the intervention of the Númenóreans, scions of the Edain (and partial descendants through Elros, of Beren and Lúthien). The armies of the King of Númenor, Tar-Minastir, defeated Sauron's forces in the Battle of the Gwathló in SA 1700. Beaten but not wholly vanquished, Sauron fled back to Mordor with only his bodyguard and began rebuilding his strength over the next centuries.
Towards the end of the Second Age, he was once again powerful enough to raise large armies to attempt to conquer Middle-earth. By this time, he assumed the titles of "Lord of the Earth" and "King of Men". He once again conquered nearly all of Middle-earth but his harassment of a number of Númenorian settlements along the western coasts brought him to the attention of Ar-Pharazôn, the most powerful King of Númenor the world had yet seen. Insulted by Sauron's claim to both dominion of the world and the title of "King of Men", when Ar-Pharazôn considered himself to be the true bearer of that mantle, Ar-Pharazôn decided to challenge Sauron and force him to swear fealty.

Ar-Pharazôn mustered an astounding Númenórean army that utterly eclipsed even Sauron's own. In SA 3261, the King landed in Umbar in Middle-earth with his troops and began the trek to Mordor. Sauron's armies were so overmatched that his forces fled from the Númenóreans as they approached Mordor, and it became quite clear to Sauron that he could not best Ar-Pharazôn by force. Thus when Ar-Pharazôn sent messengers to Barad-dûr demanding that Sauron acknowledge the Númenórean King's overlordship, Sauron descended from his fortress without any offer of battle and assumed a fair form. His appearance, mannerisms and flattery of the King confused and astonished the Númenóreans, for rumor of Sauron portrayed him to be anything but what he now presented. However, Ar-Pharazôn was not so entranced by Sauron's obsequiousness as his generals, and he demanded that Sauron come back to Númenor as a hostage.
Sauron feigned unhappiness at this development but was secretly delighted, for this presented him with an opportunity to destroy the Númenóreans from within. After only a few short years in Númenor he grew from captive to the King's most trusted adviser, and nearly all the King's court fawned upon him. Drawing on their fear of Death, he deceitfully converted many Númenóreans to the worship of Morgoth by lying that Morgoth had the power to save them from their mortality. As his power and influence reached its peak, he raised a great Temple for Morgoth in which he performed human sacrifices to the Dark Lord. Finally, he manipulated and deceived Ar-Pharazôn to rebel against the Valar and attack Valinor by lying that the one who claimed the Undying Lands would be immortal.
But here, Eru directly intervened—Númenor was drowned under the sea, and the great navy of Númenor was destroyed and the army that reached Aman was buried under mountains of falling rock and said to be imprisoned in the Caves of the Forgotten. The world was bent, so that thereafter, only Elven-ships could sail into the Utter West. Sauron's body was destroyed, but his spirit was not diminished, and he fled back to Mordor bearing the Ring, where he slowly rebuilt a new body and strength. Hereafter, he lost the ability to assume a fair shape, and ruled now through terror and force. A few Faithful Númenóreans led by Elendil were saved from the flood, and they founded two Realms in Exile, Arnor and Gondor, in Middle-earth. Ultimately, despite losing his ability to present himself as fair, Sauron had achieved an overwhelming victory in destroying Númenor, which rid him of his most powerful opposition by far in ruling Middle-earth.

After learning that Elendil, whom he had especially hated in Númenor, had survived and was ordering a realm on his borders, Sauron made war on Arnor and Gondor. However during his absence in Númenor, Gil-galad, High King of the Ñoldor, had significantly increased the power of his own realm. In his haste to prevent Elendil from strengthening his kingdoms, Sauron alerted Gil-galad to his return before his forces were fully prepared. Now aware of Sauron's resurgent threat, Gil-galad allied with Elendil to create the Last Alliance of Elves and Men, and together they marched across Middle-earth to attack Sauron. They defeated his armies in the Battle of Dagorlad, and then invaded Mordor and laid siege to Barad-dûr for seven years. Finally, Sauron himself came forth and dueled with both Elendil and Gil-galad and slew them, shattering Elendil's sword Narsil beneath him as he fell. However, Sauron was so badly wounded in turn that he was not able to stop Isildur, Elendil's son, from cutting the One Ring from his finger with one of Narsil's shards. This destroyed Sauron's physical body, but his spirit endured and fled. Sauron's remaining forces were routed soon afterwards, and Barad-dûr was leveled to its foundations.
Despite this defeat, the Dark Lord still was not fully vanquished. So long as the Ring existed, Sauron's spirit would always have the ability to endure and take shape once more. For the first millennium of the Third Age he lay in hiding, slowly recovering strength until he regained enough power to direct his old servants, the Nazgûl and other evil creatures, against the Free Peoples.
In TA 1000, Sauron became active once more, occupying the stronghold of Dol Guldur, the Hill of Sorcery, in southern Mirkwood in TA 1050, and working in secret. There, he used the guise of a dreaded sorcerer, called "the Necromancer", and the Elves did not yet discern that he was the Dark Lord returned. Around the same time, the Valar sent five Maiar as the Order of Wizards, to rally the Free Peoples of the World in countering his potential re-emergence. Though Sauron dismissed their presence "as a mere effort of defeated imperialists" (seemingly justified in the case of their chief, Saruman), Gandalf arose among them as "the Enemy of Sauron".
While the Dark Lord continued to scheme and gather strength, the Nine reappeared in TA 1300, and began steadily assaulting the Númenórean kingdoms in exile at his behest, ultimately destroying the North-kingdom of Arnor and gravely weakening the South-kingdom of Gondor. In the same period, foul things that still walked the earth or beneath it were stirred: the Northern Orcs of the Misty Mountains grew bolder in their incursions, while secretly raising strongholds and barring the passes between Eriador and the Vales of Anduin "according to the plan of their master in Dol Guldur"; the Dragons laid waste to the Dwarven mansions, consuming three of the Seven Dwarf-rings and claiming the treasure hoards. Guided by the emissaries of the Dark Lord, the Easterlings and other wicked Men also renewed their bitter feud with the Gondorians and Northmen, launching fresh attacks on the western lands.
Suspecting that Sauron had indeed returned and that his hand coordinated the steady resurgence of evil, such as the actions of the Nazgûl, Gandalf infiltrated Dol Guldur in TA 2063 to confirm his suspicion, but the Dark Lord fled eastwards to conceal his identity. This marked the beginning of the Watchful Peace, which ended with Sauron's return to Dol Guldur in TA 2460 with renewed strength. In the same year, the One Ring was finally discovered by the Stoor Sméagol and his friend, Déagol. Sméagol murdered Déagol and took the Ring for himself. Sméagol was eventually so changed by the Ring's corruption he was given the name Gollum, ostracized from his people, and dwelt secluded, deep within the Misty Mountains. With Durin's Folk driven out from Khazad-dûm by Durin's Bane, Sauron began "to people Moria with his creatures" around TA 2480; it is quite possible that the Balrog itself "had been awakened by the malice of Sauron".
"Far away here, I wonder if you fully realize the strength of a great Dragon. But that is not all: there is a Shadow growing fast in the world far more terrible. They will help one another."
—Gandalf to Thorin II, Unfinished Tales of Númenor and Middle-earth, "The Quest of Erebor"
Following the sack of Erebor, Gandalf felt that Sauron would take advantage of Middle-earth's weakened state: Arnor was no more, leaving Rivendell and Lothlórien open to an attack, and the Dwarves of the Iron Hills were the only obstacle in regaining Angmar. Above all else however, he feared that Sauron would eventually forge an alliance with the dragon Smaug, whom the Dark Lord could use to terrible effect. In TA 2850, Gandalf entered Dol Guldur again and finally confirmed that the Necromancer was indeed Sauron himself. Eventually, the White Council put forth their strength and, with Saruman's approval, attacked Dol Guldur in TA  in the hopes of ousting Sauron before he and Smaug could "help one another". The Wise were able to oust the weakened Sauron from Dol Guldur with relative ease, but Sauron had had ample time to prepare for their assault, and only feigned retreat, abandoning Dol Guldur willingly. He returned secretly to Mordor, where he would openly declare himself in TA 2951, and began preparations for his final war to dominate Middle-earth. However, shortly after Sauron's retreat from Dol Guldur, Smaug would be slain by Bard the First, eliminating the Dark Lord's most powerful potential ally.

"Now of late we have learned that the Enemy has been among [the Southrons], and they are gone over to Him, or back to Him-they were ever ready to His will-as have so many also in the East. I doubt not that the days of Gondor are numbered, and the walls of Minas Tirith are doomed, so great is His strength and malice."
—The Two Towers, "Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit"
Sauron bred immense armies of Orcs and other evil creatures and rallied Men from the east and south - many of which had served him in the past - to his banner. He also gathered his most terrifying servants, the Nazgûl, or Ringwraiths, each wearing one of the nine rings conceived for mortal Men. From among the Nine, Sauron sent Khamûl, the Second Chief, to resettle Dol Guldur and prepare it for war against Thranduil's neighbouring realm. He once again adopted the symbol of a lidless eye, and as he exerted his will over Middle-earth, the Eye of Sauron was recognized by all as a symbol of power and fear.
As part of his strategy against the kingdoms of Men, Sauron began to weaken Gondor by influencing Denethor II. Using the Palantír of Minas Ithil, the Dark Lord convinced the Ruling Steward, current owner of the Anor-stone, of his imminent victory; Denethor gradually succumbed to despair.
By TA 3000, the "shadow of Mordor reached out to Rohan". Through the Ithil-stone, Sauron communed with Saruman, who held the Orthanc-stone, and compelled him to betray the White Council and serve him with promises of power and "rich reward". Having become the Wizard's "dark master", Sauron then commanded Saruman to subjugate Rohan and form in Isengard a second pincer to crush Gondor. For the time being, Sauron tolerated the fact that Saruman was actually a faithless servant that coveted the Ring, as he could "read his thought even when he withheld information."
After Gollum was captured, Sauron had him tortured and learned that he once had a magic ring, and, from him, he heard the words Shire and Baggins. He deduced that Gollum's ring was the One Ring and released the creature in TA 3017, hoping that Gollum would unwittingly lead him to Baggins. But Gollum's trail was lost in the Dead Marshes, "where Sauron's emissaries. could not or would not follow him." The Dark Lord then learned that the creature had been captured by his enemies. Sauron decided to send the dreaded Nazgûl, to find the Shire and search for Baggins. To conceal the Nazgûl's mission and test Denethor's strength, Sauron launched an assault against Osgiliath in TA 3018. At the same time, his servants in Dol Guldur attacked Thranduil's realm, where Gollum was held, with orders to "to capture or kill Gollum". The creature, however, escaped both the Dark Lord and his enemies.
Although the Nazgûl found the Shire and came close to capturing Baggins at Weathertop, they ultimately failed to retrieve the Ring and thus returned to the Dark Lord empty-handed. Sauron then sent a Mordor-orc warband led by Grishnákh to join a group of Isengarders that was tracking down the Fellowship of the Ring. The Orcs ambushed the company at Amon Hen and successfully captured two Hobbits, but were slowed down by internal strife - partially caused by Saruman's disloyalty - and later slain on the eaves of Fangorn Forest by the Rohirrim.
Having "cheated [his] new master" by trying to claim the Ring for himself, Saruman made a final assault against Théoden King at Helm's Deep in hopes of conquering Rohan for Sauron and regaining his favor. The Wizard was defeated by the Rohirrim and Ents however, costing the Dark Lord one of his most powerful vassals, as well the large army of Isengard.
Shortly after Saruman's defeat, Peregrin Took looked into the Orthanc-stone and accidentally communicated with Sauron. At first, the Dark Lord believed he was talking to his servant and reprimanded him for neglecting to report. Realizing that the other surveyor was a Hobbit, Sauron then assumed that Pippin was Saruman's prisoner and tried to coerce information out of him. But shortly thereafter Aragorn took the palantír and revealed himself to Sauron, and seeing Aragorn, the Dark Lord concluded that his vassal had fallen and that Isildur's heir possessed the One Ring. Fearing that his enemies would use the Ring against him, Sauron sped up his plans and attacked the city of Minas Tirith in Gondor sooner than he had planned, seeking to raze the city and crush the last human resistance to his rule before his enemies could fortify it, and to prevent the Men of the West uniting under one king.
Due to the combined efforts of Gondor, Rohan, and the Dúnedain of Arnor, Sauron's army was defeated. Despite still possessing more than enough military strength to destroy Minas Tirith and easily conquer Middle-earth once Gondor fell, doubt began to grow in Sauron. As such, he watched and waited, hoping for a period of strife between Aragorn and other potential Ringlords in which he could move out and take the Ring for himself.

"If it [the Ring] is destroyed, then he will fall, and his fall will be so low that none can foresee his arising ever again. For he will lose the best part of the strength that was native to him in his beginning, and all that was made or begun with that power will crumble, and he will be maimed for ever, becoming a mere spirit of malice that gnaws itself in the shadows, but cannot again grow or take shape. And so a great evil of this world will be removed."
—The Return of the King, "The Last Debate"
Despite their successful repulse of Sauron's armies at Minas Tirith, Gandalf and Aragorn knew that the bulk of Sauron's forces remained in Mordor, readying themselves for another, deadlier strike against the city. Filled as Mordor was with Sauron's troops, Frodo Baggins stood almost no chance of reaching Mount Doom undetected. In light of the situation, Aragorn called for a council consisting of the major commanders of all the forces present in Minas Tirith, and appointed Gandalf to be their commander until the crisis had passed. Gandalf made it clear to all those present that, despite their great victory, they ultimately could not hope to defeat Sauron's armies by force. Therefore, they had two options available. They could station their remaining force, considerably greater than it had been before the battle due to the reinforcements from Rohan and southern Gondor, at Minas Tirith and hope to endure Sauron's next attack. Or, they could take a force to the Black Gate and attempt to challenge Sauron directly.
This force, as Gandalf suggested, would only need to be great enough to offer battle, and the rest of their forces could remain behind to garrison Minas Tirith. This option, though suicidal for those involved, would serve to distract Sauron from gazing into his own land, through which the Ring Bearer would be traveling. Furthermore, Gandalf theorised that, once Sauron learned that a force too small to pose any real threat to him was on its way to the Black Gate to directly assault Mordor, he would likely believe that the leader of the attacking force would have the One Ring in their possession. Sauron would assume that the Ring itself would influence its wielder, who, in his pride and overconfidence in his newfound power, might be foolish enough to challenge Sauron's might with a force too small to assault Mordor in earnest.
Their plot worked, as Sauron marshaled most of his remaining forces and marched them towards Udûn to crush the Men of the West and regain his prize. This action left the Plains of Gorgoroth largely unguarded, allowing Frodo and Sam to reach Mount Doom with far less difficulty than otherwise. However, once Frodo reached the Cracks of Doom, he finally succumbed to the power of the Ring, and put it on. Immediately, Sauron became aware of the halfling, and turned his gaze towards the mountain. He frantically sent the Ringwraiths to retrieve the Ring, but was too late, as Gollum, after taking the Ring from Frodo, slipped and fell to his death into the Cracks of Doom. The Ring was unmade. The earth shook as a great shock wave rippled across Mordor, and the foundations of Barad-dûr were finally destroyed, causing the great fortress to fall into ruin once and for all. The cone of Mount Doom burst apart in a cataclysmic eruption that consumed the eight remaining Nazgûl.
With his source of power gone, Sauron was utterly defeated and his armies bereft of the driving will behind their conquest were swollowed up by the earth and destroyed. With the One Ring destroyed, Sauron was permanently robbed of his physical form, reducing him to a malevolent spirit that hovered above Mordor as a "huge shape of shadow, impenetrable, lightning-crowned, ...terrible but impotent," only to be blown away by a great wind; he had ended on the same path as his old master, Morgoth, and was condemned to a sleepless impotent malice that feeds on itself.
With the destruction of the Ring, the vast majority of Sauron's being and his power was forever lost. With that, Sauron's spirit no longer had the power to create a new body and take shape again. Though his indestructible mind and being were bound forever to Eä, Sauron had lost all power to effect his will upon the world and could never again grow in strength.