Trolls were a race of large humanoid creatures of limited intellect. They were strong and vicious, but some of them could not endure sunlight and turned to stone when exposed to it, which rendered them permanently lifeless.
While it is unknown what happened to Trolls after the Downfall of Barad-dûr, the Hobbit Samwise Gamgee composed two poems that had Trolls in them. The first one, called The Stone Troll, was recited by Samwise Gamgee to Aragorn II, Frodo, Merry, and Pippin during their stay near the Troll Ridge. The second poem, called Perry-the-Winkle, also composed by Sam, featured a Lonely Troll as the protagonist. However, unlike other Trolls, the Lonely Troll was friendly and good-natured.
Trolls were taller and broader than Men with a height of twelve feet or more. They had dark skin with greenish scales, large flat toeless feet, and knotted hands with claws. Their blood was black.
Some Trolls might have had more than one head, which is fleetingly suggested in The Hobbit, commenting on William Huggins wiping his lips on his sleeve. If this statement was not merely a way of speaking, perhaps there were indeed Trolls in Middle-earth that, unlike the Stone-trolls, had more than one head and behaved even worse.
Regular Trolls turned back to stone from which they had been created when exposed to the sunlight, but the Trolls known as Olog-hai could tolerate sunlight as long as they were controlled by the will of Sauron.
Trolls lived in different terrains and were known as cave-trolls, hill-trolls, or mountain-trolls. They did not build buildings, but slept in caves or holes instead. It is possible that the term Stone-trolls was used for regular Trolls who turned back to stone when exposed to the sunlight. This is also suggested by the use of the term Stone-trolls before the paragraph about the Olog-hai, which could endure sunlight.
During the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, there is a reference to "men like half-trolls", also called Troll-men, but it is unclear whether these men actually had some trollish ancestry or were simply compared to trolls (for some readers, the first interpretation is supported by the similar and interchangeable terms "orc-men" and "half-orcs", referring to crossbreeds of Saruman). According to Christopher Tolkien, a character in the Thiðrekssaga (a 13th century work which influenced The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrún) who is an off-spring of a woman and an incubus, appears "troll-like" and is "all over dark, with black hair and black beard".