Éowyn was a shieldmaiden of Rohan, daughter of Éomund and Théodwyn, younger sister of Éomer and niece of King Théoden. After the War of the Ring, she married Faramir and had one son with him, Elboron.
Éowyn was the second child of Éomund and Théodwyn. Like her brother Éomer, she was related to King Théoden through their mother, the King's sister. Her father was slain and her mother died of illness in TA 3002. Afterwards, Théoden took Éomer and Éowyn in his household and raised them as his children.
Prior to the War of the Ring, Éowyn was forced to stay in Meduseld and care for her declining uncle for several years, as he was weakened by the influence of Saruman and Gríma Wormtongue. When Gandalf restored the King, he prepared to defend Rohan against Isengard. Since Théoden planned to ride to battle himself, he asked his doorwarden Háma, to suggest a leader for the people in his absence. Háma recommended Éowyn, who, though a woman, was "fearless" and "all love[d] her".
Éowyn reluctantly obeyed the King's orders to lead the people of Edoras to shelter in the White Mountains, while Aragorn, Théoden, and the rest of the men bravely faced Saruman's army in the Battle of the Hornburg. When Aragorn passed through Dunharrow to take the Paths of the Dead she confessed her growing feelings for him, but already betrothed, he reluctantly refused her.
When Denethor II urgently called for Théoden's aid against Mordor, Éowyn again, begged to be allowed to ride to battle, but Théoden refused.
Resentfully, she disguised herself as a man, taking the alias Dernhelm, and rode to Minas Tirith on her horse Windfola. She took Meriadoc Brandybuck along because he likewise wanted to follow his friends to battle, but had been refused by Théoden. Because Éowyn weighed less than a man of similar height, Windfola was able to bear both her and Merry.
In the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, she fought in Théoden's escort; when he and his company were attacked by the Witch-king of Angmar, Lord of the Nazgûl, she and Merry were the only riders who did not flee. As Théoden lay mortally wounded and crushed beneath Snowmane, Éowyn challenged the Witch-king, who boasted that "no living man may hinder me". In answer, she removed her helmet, releasing her hair, which "gleamed with pale gold upon her shoulders", and declared, "But no living man am I! You look upon a woman. Éowyn I am, Éomund's daughter... Begone, if you be not deathless! For living or dark undead, I will smite you, if you touch him."
In a rage, the Witch-king attacked her, but she clove the head of his winged steed. The Witch-king shattered her shield with a blow of his mace, breaking her arm, but stumbled when Merry stabbed his leg from behind with the Barrow-blade. Éowyn drove her sword through the Witch-king's head, killing him and fulfilling Glorfindel's prophecy from a thousand years earlier, at the Battle of Fornost, that "not by the hand of man" would the Witch-king fall. As with all weapons that touch the Witch-king, the sword and the Barrow-blade were both destroyed.[citation needed]
Her constitution already weakened by loneliness and despair, combined with physical injuries, Éowyn then succumbed to the Black Breath. Théoden, not knowing that she was nearby, told Merry with his dying words that she had been "dearer than daughter" to him. Seeing her lying apparently dead on the battlefield caused her brother Éomer to go temporarily mad, and charge in fury at the enemy. But during the battle she was found by Prince Imrahil, who noticed that she was still alive, though barely, and ordered her taken to the Houses of Healing. There she was healed there by Aragorn, the cure of the plant Athelas, and the entreaties of her distraught brother.
Éowyn remained behind in Minas Tirith while the Army of the West marched toward the Black Gate, to challenge Sauron. She met and fell in love with Faramir, who had likewise been injured before the battle. After the War of the Ring had ended, she decided to give up dreams of glory in battle and devote her life to peace and a happy marriage.
At Éowyn's insistence, Merry was made a Knight of the Riddermark. He attended Théoden's funeral and Éomer's coronation as King of Rohan, where Éowyn presented Merry with a parting gift: the Horn of Rohan, a small silver horn taken from the hoard of Scatha, the dragon.
Faramir and Éowyn settled in Ithilien, where they had at least one son, Elboron, and their grandson was Barahir, who wrote The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen in the Fourth Age. The date of Éowyn's death is nowhere recorded.