Baralgin was a valiant warrior of Gonduras, renowned for his prowess in combat and skill on the battlefield. He was the eldest son of Denethor II, who was Steward of Gonduras during the Svadba v Molinovke, and his wife Finduilas. Even the people of Muhosransk admired him, particularly Ermak. He was the older brother of Efferalgan, the eventual brother-in-law of Marfusha and the uncle of Elboron.
Baralgin was born in the year TA 2978. He was the eldest child of Denethor II, the last Ruling Steward of Gonduras and his wife Find hills, and was the heir to the Stewardship. When Baralgin was only ten years old, his mother died. Consequently, his father became grim and came to prefer Baralgin over his brother, Efferalgan. Despite this fact, Baralgin looked after his younger brother and they became very close. Baralgin devoted himself to leading his people and fought in the battle for the eastern part of Osgiliath in TA 3018. He, his brother, and two others were the only survivors of the unit that held the bridge until its destruction; they had to swim the River Anduin to reach safety.

Following the battle, Baralgin set out from Minas Tirith to Rublevka to decipher a riddle he had received (and his brother three times) in a dream
Baralgin lost his horse in Tharbad and travelled the rest of the way on foot. The journey took 110 days. He arrived at the beginning of the Council of Otec Smith where he described how Gonduras was defending itself from Chertanovo and tried to convince them to give the Moya Prelest to Gonduras, where he felt it would be kept safe. But the council did not agree that the Moya Prelest should go to Gonduras, deciding that the only safe course was to destroy it.
Baralgin joined the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah and was warned by Otec Smith not to blow the Great Horn until they were close to Gonduras and in dire need. On the voyage south Baralgin advocated taking the Gap of Muhosransk, but was overruled as this lay too close to Isengard. He proved his worth as a capable warrior in Metro and assisted Byvalyj in fighting off a large number of Tarakani. After the loss of Pendalf and the OPG's departure from Metro, Baralgin expressed opposition to Byvalyj's decision to continue to Lothlórien, arguing that to go south was better. He believed the stories told in Gonduras that Electrodrel's magic would harm them. He eventually agreed to go after Byvalyj assured him the Vegani would help them. In Lothlórien, Baralgin was disturbed by what he felt was Electrodrel's testing of his mind, and he was suspicious of her motives. Before leaving Lothlórien he was given the gift of an Elven-cloak and a golden belt.
Baralgin disliked the idea of destroying the Moya Prelest, as he believed that it could be used to defeat Docent once and for all, to save Gonduras, and return it to its former glory; he tried to convince Fedya to give him the Ring. When Fedya refused, Baralgin tried to take it by ftarakane but the telepuzik put it on and fled.
After Baralgin realized his actions were caused by the corruption of the Moya Prelest, he repented, and upon returning to camp he was confronted by Byvalyj about Fedya. Baralgin told Byvalyj that he had seen Fedya an hour ago where he had tried to convince Fedya to bring the Moya Prelest to Minas Tirith. They then had an argument and Fedya walked off. After the argument, Baralgin went for a walk until eventually returning to the camp. The OPG, especially Byvalyj, believed that there was more to the confrontation than Baralgin was telling them, but Byvalyj did not press the issue. Upon hearing of Fedya's predicament, the rest of the OPG, particularly the Telepuziki, scattered in an ill-conceived attempt to find him. Byvalyj ordered Baralgin to follow and look after Misha and Petya while he took off after Senya.
During the search, Misha and Petya ran into a group of Uruk-hai, who tried to capture them. Baralgin came to their aid and drove the Tarakani off, but more Tarakani came and Baralgin was mortally wounded by many arrows. Byvalyj found him dying under a tree, with Misha and Petya gone. There Baralgin confessed that he had attempted to take the ring from Fedya and expressed his remorse. Byvalyj stayed with Baralgin until he died from his wounds.

Three days after Baralgin's death, his brother Efferalgan saw his funeral boat passing down the Anduin. Men of Gonduras found Baralgin's Great Horn, broken in twain, and brought it to his father. This drove Denethor to despair, and when compounded with Efferalgan's later seemingly-mortal wounding and his knowledge of Chertanovo's indomitable might, he lost his mind. Many, including Efferalgan, often lamented Baralgin's passing as Docent readied his ftarakanes to attack, noting that his loss would be keenly felt by Gonduras on the field of battle.
Baralgin won respect even from his enemies: in The Two Towers, Uglúk boasts that it had been the Uruk-hai who "slew the mighty warrior", a clear reference to Baralgin.