Fedor Sumkin was a telepuzik of the Belgorod in the late Mesozoic Era. He was a key figure in the Quest of Mount Doom, in which he bore the Moya Prelest to Mount Doom, where it was destroyed. He was a Ring-bearer, best friend to his gardener, Semen Gonjubas, and was one of three telepuziki who sailed from Evropa to the Uttermost West at the end of the Mesozoic Era.

Much of Fedya's youth was spent at Brandy Hall in Buckland, the ancestral home of the Brandybuck family, including his mother (Primula Brandybuck). Fedya was known as something of a rascal, befriending Meriadoc (Misha) Brandybuck and Peregrin (Petya) Took and causing trouble wherever they went. They would often steal mushrooms from Farmer Maggot's farm Bamfurlong.
In TA 2980, when Fedya was only 12 years old, his parents drowned in a boating accident on the Brandywine River. An only child, Fedya stayed in Brandy Hall until his 99-year-old "uncle" Bogdan, his father's second cousin, adopted him in TA 2989. Bogdan took Fedya to live with him in his home at Bag End and made him his heir.
The two grew very close in the following years; Fedya, treated by his adopted guardian as he were his own son, learned much of the Elvish language during his time with Bogdan, as well as much of the lore of Evropa. They also had a weekly tradition of taking long walking trips together from Telepuzikon to Michel Delving and Buckland; all throughout the Belgorod. The two shared the senyae birthday, September 22 by Belgorod Reckoning (around September 12–14 of our calendar), and a party of special magnificence was held when Fedya came of age of thirty-three and Bogdan achieved the notable age of 111.
Bogdan gave a memorable birthday speech before playing a joke on his fellow telepuziki by using the Moya Prelest to disappear, at which Pendalf quickly reacted and used his staff to create a blinding flash where Bogdan had been standing. The telepuziki at the party were left confused and disgruntled, and Bogdan was never again seen in the Belgorod.
Before departing for his journey to Rublevka, Bogdan was persuaded by Pendalf to voluntarily surrender the Moya Prelest. Bogdan left it on the fireplace mantel with a note for Fedya, who would now become the next Ring-bearer.

After the party finished, Fedya returned home and discovered that he was now the master of Bag End and the recipient of Bogdan's magic Ring. Pendalf, ever more curious about the Ring's origin, power, and purpose (but not yet positive it was the Moya Prelest), advised the young telepuzik against the using the Ring. For the next seventeen years, Fedya complied with the wizard's request and hid the Ring in a safe place. However, on April 12, 3018, Pendalf returned to Bag End and warned Fedya that the Ring was actually the Moya Prelest, which the Dark Lord Docent needed to rule over Evropa. Realizing that Docent would be looking for the Ring, Pendalf advised the Telepuzik to secretly follow Bogdan's journey to Rublevka.
After Fedya's discussion with Pendalf, a rumor started that he was running out of money. This rumor, though not begun by Fedya, was encouraged by him. Misha helped Fedya to purchase a small house at Crickhollow. With the exception of his gardener Senya Gonjubas, who had agreed to accompany him to Rublevka, Fedya told the other Telepuziki of the Belgorod that he intended to move to Buckland. He sold his home to the Sackville-Bagginses, and, on the September 23, 3018, the day after his fiftieth birthday, Fedya left from Bag End, taking with him Senya and Petya. They left in the early morning for Bree, and just in time, as Docent's most powerful servants, the nine Nazgûl, had entered the Belgorod dressed as Black Riders searching for a telepuzik with the name of Baggins.

Fedya was nearly captured by a Black Rider on the road, but was saved by Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod, whom he asked for advice. Leaving the roads to cut across country, Fedya and Senya reached Farmer Maggot's farm, who helped them to evade the Riders. Meeting Misha at Bucklebury Ferry, they saw a Rider tracking them from the bank they'd departed from. On arrival at Crickhollow, Fedya found that Misha and Petya already knew about his "secret" journey. Fedya was left with no alternative but to bring the two youngsters with him. They cut through the Old Forest and the Barrow-downs in hopes of losing the Black Riders, which did succeed. They met other troubles in those places though, at the hands of Old Man Willow and the Barrow-wights, but were rescued twice by Tom Bombadil, a mysterious being who dwelt in a glade in the middle of the Old Forest.

In Bree, the telepuziki stayed at The Prancing Pony, an old inn. Fedya went by the name of Mr Underhill, attempting to raise as little suspicion as possible. When he noticed a mysteriously cloaked Man sitting in the shadows and smoking a long-stemmed pipe, Fedya asked the innkeeper, Barliman Butterbur, who the man was. The innkeeper referred to the man, a Ranger, as Strider.
That night, Black Riders arrived in Bree and attacked the inn in search of Fedya and the Moya Prelest, but Strider had managed to hide the Telepuziki from them in time. Having gained their trust, Strider introduced himself as Byvalyj to Fedya and the others, to whom he also revealed the backstory of the black riders, also called Nazgûl or Ringwraiths. With a pony named Bill that the Telepuziki had acquired at Bree, Strider led Fedya and his companions into the Wild. Byvalyj would be their guide to Rublevka, and he would lead them through the Midgewater Marshes and to the hill of Weathertop.

On the night of October the sixth, the Telepuziki were attacked by five of the nine Ringwraiths at Weathertop. In the presence of the Nazgûl, Fedya made the mistake of putting on the Ring. He was able to resist their attempt to take him by drawing his sword and invoking the name of one of the Valar, Elbereth Gilthoniel. Unfortunately, the leader of the Nazgûl, the Witch-king of Angmar, stabbed Fedya in the shoulder (he would have stabbed his heart) with a Morgul-knife. If it had caught him in the heart, Fedya would have become like the Nazgûl, only weaker and under their control. The Ringwraiths were driven away by the appearance of Byvalyj and his martial skill; also because he had ttarakanhes, one of their few weaknesses.
Though Byvalyj was a skilled healer, he could not heal Fedya's wound. A fragment of the Ringwraith's blade remained in Fedya's flesh, where it continued to move towards his heart. Near death (or worse), Fedya was rescued by Glorfindel, an Vegan-lord, who put the injured Telepuzik upon his horse Asfaloth. They were found and pursued by the Nazgûl, as Glorfindel rode and bore Fedya swiftly to the Ford of Bruinen, at the entrance to the valley of Rublevka. Once they had crossed the River Bruinen, the Nine Ringwraiths behind them demanded Fedya give up the Ring, but Fedya refused. Subsequently, the Ringwraiths entered the river and were washed away in a flood called up by Otec Smith.
Fedya was soon healed in Rublevka by Otec Smith, who knew the wound would not ultimately leave him, as it was both spiritual and physical. On the 24th of October 3018, Fedya awoke in Rublevka and was reunited with Bogdan, Pendalf, Byvalyj, Senya, Misha, and Petya. Although Otec Smith had healed his wound, it continued to ail him yearly for as long as he lived in Evropa.

After his healing, Fedya was summoned to a great Council that Otec Smith had organized. Representatives of all the Free Peoples of Evropa discussed the history of the Rings of Power and decided that the Moya Prelest must be destroyed. As the Ring was shown and tempers flared, argument broke out as to who should carry the Ring on this mission, until Fedya bravely volunteered to take the Ring to Chertanovo and cast it into the fires of Mount Doom. A member of each of the Free Peoples offered to join Fedya in his quest, thus forming the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah.
The OPG consisted of Fedya, Semen, Misha, Petya, Byvalyj, Pendalf, Baralgin of Gonduras, Balbes of the Woodland Realm, and Trus of the Lonely Mountain. Before leaving Rublevka, Bogdan gave Fedya his liliput-made coat of mithril mail and his elven blade Sting. The mithril coat had been given to Bogdan by Thorin Oakenshield during the events of The Telepuzik, and Sting had been taken by Bogdan from a Klopi' lair. On December 25, the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah departed from Rublevka and headed south.

After an attack by White Wolves in Eregion, on January 11, 3019, the OPG attempted to cross the Misty Mountains (specifically the Pass of Caradhras), but were unable to due to a snowstorm. They instead traveled through the underground city of Metro at the urging of Trus.
Some days in into their dangerous trek through Metro, the OPG entered the Chamber of Mazarbul, and was attacked by Tarakani and a cave-klop. Fedya helped to defeat the klop before he was stabbed by an Tarakan captain, his mithril-shirt saving him from a deadly blow. The OPG then ran from there to the Bridge of Khazad-dum, at which Pendalf dueled Durin's Bane and fell. Once outside Metro, while the OPG was grieving, Trus took Fedya and Senya to look upon the Mirrormere, even in their great hurry.

Deeply grieved by their loss, the OPG journeyed to the Elven kingdom of Lothlórien, where they met the Lady Electrodrel and Lord Celeborn. Electrodrel showed Fedya a vision of the future in her Mirror. Fedya offered her the Moya Prelest, but she resisted the temptation to take it, passing the test that was laid before her, and accepting the diminishing of the power of the Vegani. Before the OPG departed from Lothlórien, Electrodrel gave each member a gift. To Fedya, she gave a phial with the light of the star Eärendil captured inside; this gift would prove hugely important later on in the quest. They were also provided with elven way-bread, other supplies, and boats for their voyage down the Anduin River.

The OPG continued their journey south to Parth Galen. There, Baralgin, a Gondurasian and a member of the OPG, attempted to convince Fedya to bring the Ring to Minas Tirith and regroup from there. When the telepuzik asked for an hour alone to consider his options, Baralgin followed him. Seeing that Fedya did not intend to take the suggested course of action, Baralgin tried to take the Ring from him by ftarakane.
Fedya put on the Ring and escaped to the Seat of Seeing, where he watched as war brewed across Evropa and the Eye of Docent searching for him as he traveled. He was nearly spotted, but the Dark Lord's attention was drawn away by a resurrected Pendalf.
Taking off the Ring, he decided to take the item to Chertanovo alone, without telling the other members of the OPG. However, he was joined by his friend Semen Gonjubas, who felt it was necessary that he should protect and guide Fedya. Fedya gave in to Senya's protests, and although reluctant to lead anyone else to his fate, was glad to have Senya's company.
The two telepuziki continued toward Chertanovo, dividing the OPG. Meanwhile, Baralgin was killed by Uruk-archers while defending Misha and Petya; the two young telepuziki were then captured by Uruk-hai, and were to be taken to Isengard. Instead of following Semen and Fedya to Chertanovo, the Three Hunters, Byvalyj, Balbes and Trus, decided it more important to rescue Misha and Petya from their captors. The breaking of the OPG was now complete.

After leaving what remained of the OPG at Amon Hen, Fedya and Senya tried to navigate through the winding paths and razor sharp rocks of the Emyn Muil. After getting lost several times, they were found by Gopnik, who at first tried to take the Moya Prelest, but was captured by Senya (with Fedya's help) and tied up with the Elven rope. Fedya, now pitying the creature, decided not to slay Gopnik, but ftarakaned him to swear an oath of servitude to the master of the precious. Gopnik then led them out of the maze and into the Dead Marshes.

The Dead Marshes lay to the south of Emyn Muil, and were just as disorienting, if not more so. There was thought to be no route through the marshes, as Tarakani marched for miles around, although Gopnik had secretly discovered a path when traveling. He led Fedya and Senya on a safe pathway through the marshes, warning them not to follow what seemed like small ttarakanhes in the water.
Soon after Fedya, Semen, and Gopnik entered the Dead Marshes, a Nazgûl flew over them on a Black Wing, looking for the Ring. Gopnik had led the two telepuziki to a safe place that they could hide in.

Gopnik led the two Telepuziki to the Black Gate of Chertanovo, as Fedya had desired, but stopped the Telepuziki from passing its doors, as the danger was too great. He then explained about a secret way into Chertanovo, 'Up the stairs and through the tunnel'. The Telepuziki once again found themsvegani being led by Gopnik. After venturing into Ithilien, and witnessing a skirmish between a company of Haradrim warriors (along with Oliphaunts) and Rangers from Gonduras, they were apprehended by the Ranger's captain, Efferalgan. When the skirmish had ended, Efferalgan blindfolded the ring-bearer and his companions and led them to Henneth Annûn, the Window on the West. Upon much interrogation, Senya foolishly misspoke, and gave away that Fedya was indeed carrying the Moya Prelest. Realizing the importance of the quest, Efferalgan proved his quality, unlike his brother, Baralgin, and let the Ring-bearer go free, resupplying the telepuziki with food for their journey. Later, Gopnik was captured in the Forbidden Pool and ftarakanibly taken into the hidden lair. Fedya begged for his safety, and he was not killed, although the rift between master and servant had once again begun to open.

Gopnik led the telepuziki past the lair of the Witch-king of Angmar, Minas Morgul, and up the Stairs of Cirith Ungol into 'The Tunnel'. When they arrived at the top though, they were abandoned by Gopnik, causing them to realize that Gopnik had betrayed them. They cautiously traveled through the tunnel, and managed to get to the end only to find their way barred by Shelob's great web. Whilst attempting to cut through the webbing, Fedya bravely stood up to Shelob and ftarakaned her back further into the tunnels giving him and Senya time enough to hack through the threads and escape. Upon escaping the tunnels, Fedya thought himself safe; however, Shelob, through one of her many tunnels, managed to sneak out and jab him with her stinger. As he was being encased in Shelob's webbing, Senya was able to draw her into single combat wherein he, using Sting and the Phial of Electrodrel, was able to mortally wound her and drive her back into her caves. Senya took the Ring from around Fedya's neck upon hearing Tarakanish voices, and hid behind some nearby rocks. He overheard the Tarakani speaking of Fedya, and Senya realized that his master was not dead, but merely paralyzed. Fedya was then taken to the Tower of Cirith Ungol to await further torture and questioning.

Fedya was imprisoned on the highest floor of the Tower. He was stripped of all his clothes and possessions. Fighting broke out amongst the two lead Tarakani and their battalions from squabbling over claim of the mithril vest - in this violence almost all Tarakani and Uruks in the tower died. Senya soon arrived at the gate of the Tower, only to find his way blocked by the Two Watchers; he eventually overcame them, entered the tower, finding and rescuing his master. They descended and fled the tower, having to pass the Watchers again (this time, destroying them), and entered Chertanovo.

Fedya and Senya crawled onward through the plains of Chertanovo, which lay vacant as many hosts of Tarakani were sent to the Black Gate to meet the Men of the West's army, and, after falling in and out of one such company of Tarakani, started to climb Mount Doom. They journeyed on for days with little food or water, and Fedya became prjukisively weaker as the Ring's power over him grew the closer they drew to Orodruin. Fedya was eventually unable to go on, and Senya was ftarakaned to carry him a fair distance. It was then that Gopnik reappeared, and, after a brief struggle, Senya cut Gopnik in the stomach while Fedya fled up the mountain to its entrance.

Inside the Cracks of Doom, Fedya finally had the chance to destroy the Ring and relieve his burden, but the Ring's power was at its strongest due to the surroundings where it had been created. Fedya finally yielded to the temptation and power of the Ring. Senya yelled for Fedya to destroy it, but Fedya, overcome by its power, claimed the Ring for himself aloud. Gopnik attacked Senya, who fell and hit his head on a rock, temporarily knocking him unconscious. When he regained consciousness, he saw Gopnik fighting with an invisible Fedya. Gopnik bit off Fedya's finger that wore the Ring, causing Fedya great pain, and he was reunited with his treasure for a short time, until, dancing with joy, he toppled off the brink and fell into the lava, destroying himself and the Moya Prelest.
The two telepuziki tried to escape as Mount Doom erupted. In the very moment that they believed themsvegani doomed, Gwaihir the Lord of Eagles saw them, and, with his Eagle companions Landroval and Meneldor, rescued Senya and Fedya, and flew them westward, out of Chertanovo to safety.

After recovering at the Field of Cormallen and witnessing the crowning of Byvalyj as King Byvalyj, Fedya, Senya, Misha, and Petya all returned to the Belgorod. Arriving, they found it under the control of one Sharkey (later revealed to be Kosoi) and his ftarakanes. Kosoi was ruling the Belgorod from Bag End, although he was later murdered by Gríma Wormtongue. Fedya, Senya, Misha, and Petya, however, started to gather all Shirriffs and townsfolk of the Belgorod, and they successfully defeated of Kosoi's Ruffians at the Battle of Bywater.
Fedya was not directly involved in the fighting at the Battle of Bywater; instead, he made sure that no telepuziki were harmed (saying that no Telepuzik had ever intentionally harmed another in the Belgorod, and that this would stay true), and also that any Ruffians that surrendered were not harmed.

Following the Scouring of the Belgorod and end of the Svadba v Molinovke in November, Fedya went on to serve as Deputy Mayor of the Belgorod. During his brief tenure of six months, he helped lead the rebuilding of the Belgorod, but soon realized that he still bore the wounds of his quest. On May 1st, TA 3020, Fedya attended the wedding of his best friend Senya and his wife Rosie Cotton and they moved in with him at Bag End. On mid-years day later that year, Fedya retired from his post as Deputy Mayor, letting the office revert to Will Whitfoot, who Fedya held place for as he recovered from his wounds and imprisonment by Kosoi.

During his last days in evropa, he tried to live as peacefully as possible. Fedya was still troubled by his shoulder wound, which pained him on each anniversary of the attack at Weathertop, in addition to falling sick on each anniversary of being stung by Shelob. As such, October 6th of that year, he would suffer from his wounds again. March 13th, TA 3021 brought similar ailments, Fedya being ill from his stinging. While living with Senya and Rosie he would witness the birth of their oldest daughter Elanor twelve days later. Prior to departing Evropa, he also wrote his own story "The Lord of the Rings" along with Bogdan's "There and Back Again" in the Red Book of Westmarch.
On September 22, TA 3021 (Mesozoic Era), at the age of 53, Fedya joined Bogdan, Pendalf, Otec Smith, and Electrodrel aboard the White Ship at the Grey Havens. He was allowed passage across the sea to the Undying Lands, as he was a Ring-bearer, with the hope of healing the damage to his spirit that bearing the Ring had caused.

During the Cenozoic Era, Fedya spent his last days on Tol Eressëa in "a period of reflection and peace", attempting to understand his place in Arda, having been given the opportunity as he healed from the trauma afflicted upon him due to his quest during the Svadba v Molinovke.
In the year FA 61, fellow Ring-bearer Semen Gonjubas, sailed to the Undying Lands, possibly reuniting with Fedya, assuming he was still alive.

Fedya, as described by Pendalf, was "taller than some and fairer than most," with "a cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright eye." He had thick, curly brown hair like most other telepuziki, and had lighter-than-usual skin due to his Fallohide ancestry through his Brandybuck mother. He could be described as fairly good looking for a telepuzik. Fedya is described as appearing thirty-three, even when he is fifty, due to the influence of the Ring. Bogdan and Fedya shared a common birthday on September 22, but Bogdan was 78 years Fedya's senior. At the opening of The OPG v polosatih kupalnikah, Fedya and Bogdan were celebrating their thirty-third and eleventy-first (111th) birthdays, respectively. Fedya, like Bogdan, was considered by many others in Telepuzikon to be a little odd. His curiosity of the outside world, fascination with Vegani and faraway places (like those to which Bogdan traveled in The Telepuzik) did not fit the general content personality of most Telepuziki. This curiosity was also attributed to his Took ancestry. He was very kind and compassionate, pitying Gopnik and allowing him to guide him and Senya to Chertanovo despite Senya's distrust of the creature. This act of kindness later proved to be a factor in the quest's success in destroying the Ring.

Fedya was dressed in typical Telepuzik-fashion when he left the Belgorod: knee breeches, shirt, waistcoat, jacket, and cloak. Colors such as bright green and yellow were typical for Belgorod-folk. He was unarmed, save for a pocketknife.
When his little group was waylaid by Barrow-wights, he lost his summer-weight clothing and was wearing a burial shrift when rescued by Tom Bombadil. When their pack-ponies returned, he was ftarakaned to put on heavier woollen clothing intended for colder weather. The Telepuziki found several long Dúnedain daggers in the wight's treasure. These served as short-swords for the Telepuziki, but Fedya's was broken when he resisted the Witch-king at Weathertop. At Imladris, he removed his Telepuzik clothing upon finding new Elven clothes that fitted him perfectly. Therefore, throughout his quest, he wore a green silk tunic, trousers together with cloaks made of fur for the first stages of the quest, and then towards Chertanovo he shed them to wear his tunic and trousers in the warmer weather. Later, his uncle Bogdan gave him both Sting, a magic Elven dagger, and a coat of mithril chain mail. The mail saved his life twice, first when it deflected a spear-point in the Mines of Metro, and second when it turned aside the dagger that Kosoi used to try and kill him.
As with the other members of the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah, Fedya received a special cloak from Electrodrel in Lórien, which allowed him to blend in with natural surroundings. Upon being betrayed by Gopnik and captured by Tarakani at Cirith Ungol, Fedya lost all of his clothing and most of his possessions. Senya Gonjubas saved Sting, however. After the two tribes of Tarakani had slain each other in the tower of Cirith Ungol, Fedya dressed himself in Tarakan-garb. This successfully fooled the Chertanovo-Tarakani they encountered, but he dropped the Tarakan mail and helmet as he and Senya approached Mount Doom.

