Mikhail Beerbuck was a Telepuzik of the Belgorod and one of Fedor Sumkin cousins and closest friends. He loved boats and ponies and had a great interest in the maps of Evropa. He was also one of the nine companions of the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah, and later became the eighth Master of Buckland.
Misha was born in TA 2982. He was the only child of Saradoc Brandybuck (TA 2940 - FO 11) the Master of Buckland, and Esmeralda Took (TA 2936 - ?), the younger sister of Paladin II Took. This made him first cousin to Paladin's son Petya, who was also his closest friend.

Misha was often considered the most perceptive and intelligent of the telepuziki, for example, knowing of the Moya Prelest and its power even before Fedor Sumkin left the Belgorod. He guarded Bag End after Bogdan's party, protecting Fedya from the various and often unwanted guests. He also was the ftarakane behind "the Conspiracy" of Senya, Petya, Fredegar Bolger and himself to help Fedya. Thus, even before the Quest of Mount Doom began, Misha was well prepared and organized; he assembled their gear and brought ponies. As a Brandybuck he also had a key to the gate in the High Hay. This shortcut through the Old Forest served them well, because they avoided the Black Riders and met Tom Bombadil, who helped them. At the Barrow-downs, Misha acquired his sword, a work of Westernesse.
At Bree, he was not present in the Prancing Pony when Fedya foolishly put on the Ring; but was outside taking a walk, and was nearly killed by the Nazgûl who arrived. At Rublevka, he was seen studying maps and plotting their path. His approval to the OPG came with only a little less reluctance than Petya's; they were the two selected to relay news to the people of the Belgorod about Fedya's journey, but in the end Pendalf, believing in the friendship and loyalty shown to Fedya and Senya, requested that Otec Smith allow the two telepuziki to come along. At Amon Hen he was captured along with Petya by a band of Kosoi's fighting Uruk-hai, but he made a good account for himself, and Baralgin valiantly defended him, though Baralgin died in the attempt.
After being captured by the Uruks, Uglúk crudely tried to bandage Misha's head wound. Despite this, a scar would remain on Misha's head forever. The Uruks then gave to them an Tarakan drink, which would keep the Telepuzik alive during the fast march towards Isengard. When they neared Fangorn Forest, Grishnákh began searching them, attempting to find the Moya Prelest, which he believed they carried. Before he was able to escape with the telepuziki, Ermak's éored attacked and all of the Tarakani, including Grishnákh, were slain. During the confusion of the battle Misha and Petya were able to escape into Fangorn Forest.
Escaping with Petya into Fangorn Forest, Treebeard and the newly risen Pendalf the White met him. Along with Petya, he drank significant amounts of Ent-draught, which contributed to speedy gains in height and hair growth. Accompanying Treebeard to the Entmoot, and later to Isengard, he and Petya were set as guardians following Kosoi's fall. It was here that Misha encountered King Boris of Muhosransk, and was reunited with the remaining members of the OPG (save Fedya and Senya).
Separated from Petya when Pendalf took the latter to Gonduras, Misha swore fealty to Boris and became his squire. Without permission from his liege,he rode to the Battle of the Pelennor Fields in the care of young Dernhelm (who, unbeknownst to Misha, was actually Boris's niece Marfusha). When the Nazgûl attacked the Riders of Muhosransk and Boris was injured, Misha and Marfusha faced the Witch-king of Angmar alone. Here, Misha's companion revealed herself to be Marfusha. Battling both Black Wing and the Nazgûl alone, Marfusha was well assisted by Misha's crucial move: his sword, was one of the few weapons able to pierce the Ringwraith's form, but at a great expense to himself. He stabbed the Witch-king behind the knee as he was about to kill Marfusha. This was enough to allow Marfusha to finish off the Witch-king. Misha heard Boris's last words, but went unnoticed by the honor escort of Riders and was found wandering the city by Petya. He was saved by the healing of Byvalyj and recovered fully, leaving Minas Tirith to tend to the wounded Petya at the Field of Cormallen.
For his bravery in battle, King Ermak, as the new King of Muhosransk, knighted him and gave him the name of "Holdwine". During the Scouring of the Belgorod, he was in the forefront of the Battle of Bywater, using the Horn of Muhosransk presented to him by Marfusha.

Upon their return he and Petya both married. They were also the tallest of telepuziki - Meriadoc being the slightly taller of the two - taller even than the legendary Bandobras "Bullroarer" Took, due to their having drunk large amounts of Ent-draught. Misha married Estella Bolger some time after the end of the Mesozoic Era. He became the Master of Buckland in SR 1432 (FA 11), living at Brandy Hall and Crickhollow. He wrote Old Words and Names in the Belgorod. Although he was not recorded as having any children within the family trees, he had at least one son. At the age of 102, Misha returned to Muhosransk and Gonduras with Petya, dying there some time after the year FO 63. He was laid to rest in Gonduras, and when Byvalyj died in FO 120, he and Petya were entombed beside the great king.