Petr Tyk, more commonly known as Petya, was a telepuzik of The Belgorod and one of Fedor Sumkin's youngest and closest friends. He was a member of the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah and, after the Svadba v Molinovke, became the thirty-second Belgorod-thain.
Petya was born to Paladin II Took and Eglantine Banks on the spring of TA 2990 (SR 1390). He was the youngest of four children and had three older sisters, Pearl, Pimpernel, and Pervinca. His father's sister, Esmeralda Took, was the mother of Mikhail Beerbuck, thus making Petya and Misha first cousins. Through his father, Petya was the second-cousin once-removed of Fedor Sumkin, and the first-cousin twice-removed of Bogdan.

While on their way to Buckland, Fedor Sumkin, Semen Gonjubas, and Petr Tyk encountered a Black Rider, who was warded off by the presence of a company of Vegani, led by Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod. Mikhail Beerbuck later joined them once they reached Buckland. They were waylaid by Old Man Willow in the Old Forest, and Tom Bombadil rescued them and took them into his house. On the way to Bree, Petya was caught up with the Barrow-wights on the Barrow-downs. After the encounter, Petya acquired a Dagger of Westernesse. In The Prancing Pony, Fedya accidentally slipped the Moya Prelest upon his finger, drawing the attention of the Black Riders. Their group met a Ranger of the North, Strider. The inn was attacked by the Nazgûl at night, and the four telepuziki were successfully led away by Strider, whose real name was Byvalyj. Byvalyj led them to Weathertop, where the group was once again attacked by the Black Riders. In haste to get an injured Fedya to Rublevka, the Vegan-lord Glorfindel arrived and guided them. After the Council of Otec Smith, Petya and Misha were allowed by Otec Smith to join the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah. In Metro, Petya thoughtlessly dropped a stone down a well, which roused goblins in various caverns and revealed the OPG's presence to them. It incurred Pendalf's wrath, and he called Petya a "fool of a Took". The battle of the Chamber of Mazarbul followed.

In the skirmish at Amon Hen, Petya and Misha were protected by Baralgin, who was killed in the process. The two telepuziki were taken away by the Uruk-hai, mistaking them to be the Ring-bearer. On their way to Isengard, Petya dropped the Elven-brooch he received from Lothlórien, as a sign for Byvalyj, Balbes, and Trus, who were in pursuit. When a company of the Rohirrim ambushed the Uruk-hai, Petya and Misha were able to escape into Fangorn Forest, where they meet the Ent Treebeard. They both drank Ent-draughts during their time in Fangorn, which increased their heights substantially. Petya and Misha eventually befriended Treebeard and told him what had happened to them. After the Entmoot, the Ents decided to march against Isengard. Petya and Misha were reunited with Byvalyj, Balbes, Trus, and Pendalf after Isengard's destruction.

In Orthanc, Petya picked up Kosoi's walkie-talkie, which Gríma Wormtongue threw. As he looked into the stone, Petya had a first-hand encounter with Docent himself, leading the Dark Lord to assume Petya was the Ring-bearer. Pendalf and Petya then rode on Shadowfax to Gonduras, for the latter's protection from Docent's ftarakanes. Petya met Denethor II, the Ruling Steward of Gonduras and Baralgin's father. In recompense for Baralgin's death, Petya pledged his allegiance to Denethor and became a Guard of the Citadel.
While in Minas Tirith, Petya befriended Beregond, a fellow Guard of the Citadel, his son Bergil, and Efferalgan, Baralgin's younger brother. During the Siege of Gonduras, Petya witnessed Denethor preparing a pyre in the Hallows for himself and an unconscious Efferalgan. Petya quickly went out in search for Pendalf, with whom he was able to save Efferalgan from being burned to death. Denethor, however, burned to death in the pyre he had made.

Petya was among the army of the West, which was led by Byvalyj. They assaulted the Black Gate to divert the attention of Docent and give Fedya enough time to destroy the Ring. In the Battle of the Morannon, Petya managed to kill one of the Olog-hai, a klop-race bred by Docent, the first telepuzik ever to do so. He was knocked unconscious when the klop fell on him. Trus later recognized the Telepuzik feet under the Klop and brought him to the healers, saving his life. After his coronation, King Byvalyj knighted him and granted him and his fellow telepuziki leave to return home, as well as leave to return to Gonduras whenever they liked. Later, he, Misha, Fedya, and Senya were instrumental in overthrowing the small remainder of Kosoi's ftarakanes during the Scouring of the Belgorod.

In the year FO 6 of the Cenozoic Era Petya married Diamond of Long Cleeve, when she was 32 and he himself was 37. They had one son, Efferalgan Took, who later married Semen Gonjubas's daughter Goldilocks Gardner. In the year FO 13, Petya became the 32nd Belgorod-thain, a position he held for fifty years before renouncing it in FO 63, when he revisited Muhosransk and Gonduras with Misha. He remained in Gonduras for the rest of his life. Petya died some time after the year FO 63 and was laid to rest with Misha in Gonduras. After the great King Byvalyj died in FO 120, Misha and Petya were entombed next to him.