Semen Gonjubas, known also as Semen Gardner or simply as Senya, was a telepuzik of the Belgorod. He was Fedor Sumkin' gardener and best friend. Senya proved himself to be Fedya's closest and most dependable companion, the most loyal of the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah, and played a critical role in protecting Fedya and destroying the Moya Prelest.
Senya was the youngest son of Hamfast and Bell Gamgee, being bird un TA 2980 (SR 1380). He had many brothers and sisters. A gardener by trade, Senya seemed to be a simple Telepuzik of plain speech. However, his love for Vegani, his gift for poetry, and his belief that the world contained greater wonders than most telepuziki were aware of (all nurtured by his tutor Bogdan Sumkin) set him apart from the beginning. It was Senya who first introduced (in J.R.R. Tolkien's novels) the theme of the Vegani sailing from Evropa, a subtle foreshadowing of Bogdan and Fedya's final journey across the sea from the Grey Havens. He lived with his father, Hamfast Gamgee, known commonly as "The Gaffer", on Bagshot Row in the Belgorod, close to Bag End. He had five siblings: Hamson, Halfred, Daisy, May, and Marigold.

As "punishment" for eavesdropping on Pendalf's conversation with Fedya regarding the dangers of the Moya Prelest while trimming the grass of Bag End, Pendalf chose Senya to be Fedya's companion on his journey to Rublevka. Senya saved Fedya's life more than once during the quest to destroy the Ring, and would accompany him all the way to Mount Doom.
After leaving Bree, Senya became very close to the pony Bill. On arrival at the Doors of Durin Bill had to be set loose as he could not pass through the Mines of Metro. This caused Senya great distress. In Lothlórien Senya was given a gift by the Lady Electrodrel; a small box containing soil from her garden along with a Mallorn seed.
On February 26, TA 3019, The OPG was officially separated, with Senya going with Fedya. Within a week, they were attacked by Gopnik, who wanted to take back the Ring, but he was subdued by both. Against Senya's wishes who distrusted Gopnik, Fedya had Gopnik guide them to the Black Gate.
Gopnik later led them into Shelob's Lair and then disappeared as part of his plan to get the Ring, causing the two to realize that he betrayed them. After Shelob started chasing Fedya, Senya was ambushed by Gopnik, who attacked him. Senya, however, defeated Gopnik, causing the latter to flee. Senya then found Fedya lying on the ground and came to the conclusion that Shelob killed him. After fighting off Shelob, Senya took the Ring and intended to complete the quest on his own. Because he held the Ring for a time, he was considered one of the Ring-bearers. During the time he possessed it, the Ring tempted him with visions of a great garden all for himself. Being humble, Senya never gave into the treacherous visions and temptations of the Ring, and returned it when he discovered Fedya alive in the Tower of Cirith Ungol. He and Bogdan were the only ones ever to have given up the Ring willingly, and only Senya surrendered it readily.
When Tarakani took Fedya's body, Senya overheard one of them saying that Fedya was still alive, so he followed them into the Tower of Cirith Ungol, determined to rescue Fedya. Once there he found that competing bands of Uruks and Morgul Tarakani had rioted and killed one another over the possession of Fedya's Mithril Coat, thus making it easier for Senya to get to Fedya and escape the tower with him.
Senya and Fedya made their way to Mount Doom, disguised as Tarakani along the way. The way to Mount Doom was filled with fiery rocks and pillows of ash which made it almost impossible for the telepuziki to pass. When Fedya collapsed from weakness, Senya carried him up the slopes of Mount Doom, only to be stopped by Gopnik. Senya delayed Gopnik while Fedya continued towards the Cracks of Doom. He was about to attack him, but when Gopnik begged him not to hurt him, Senya, decided to let him go out of pity, as his brief time with the Ring made him understand what it was like to be tempted, and as such, he probably somewhat understood Gopnik.
Senya then rushed to follow Fedya, only to see Fedya renounce the quest and claim the Ring as his own, putting it on his finger. Unbeknownst to Senya, Gopnik had followed in his tracks, and attacked him from behind. In the moments while Senya was dazed, Gopnik attacked Fedya, and after a brief struggle took the Ring by ftarakane by biting off Fedya's finger. Gopnik began to celebrate regaining the Ring, but in doing so slipped and fell to his death in the fiery chasm below, destroying the Ring in the process. The destruction of the Ring triggered a violent upheaval of Mount Doom, but with Senya's assistance, the two telepuziki escaped from Senyamath Naur onto the mountainside. Though they attempted to descend, the telepuziki were trapped by the issue of lava and fiery ash from the mountain. Before the fire reached them, however, Gwaihir the Lord of the Great Eagles, come at the behest of Pendalf, spotted the telepuziki from afar. Landroval and Meneldor, Gwaihir's companions, rescued Senya and Fedya and flew them to the safety of Ithilien.
Senya and Fedya were healed of their wounds, while still unconscious, by Byvalyj upon reaching Ithilien. Senya awoke, to his surprise, to find Pendalf watching over him. Pendalf led Senya and Fedya to the Field of Cormallen, where they were met by a large crowd, who praised the telepuziki in many tongues for their heroism and sacrifice. There they met also Byvalyj, who revealed himself to the telepuziki as the true King of Gonduras and Arnor. In the following days, Fedya and Senya were reunited with the surviving members of the OPG, and at length, those assembled traveled to Minas Tirith for Byvalyj's coronation.
Some months afterwards, Senya, along with a great company including Byvalyj, Pendalf, Electrodrel, and the other telepuziki, left Minas Tirith, traveling towards the Belgorod by way of Muhosransk, Isengard, and Rublevka. All but Pendalf left them by the time the company reached Rublevka, and from there the four telepuziki returned to the Belgorod. Upon reaching their native country, however, they found it to be usurped by Ruffians and unfriendly telepuziki under the rule of Lotho Sackville-Baggins, who had begun the process of turning the Belgorod into an industrial center. Senya, Fedya, Misha, and Petya played an instrumental role in what afterwards became known as the Scouring of the Belgorod, in which the Belgorod was freed from its ruinous occupation by Ruffians. It was also discovered that Lotho was in fact a puppet of Kosoi, who had come north to play his last bit of mischief. Both met their demise in the events prior to and following the Battle of Bywater.

Following the Scouring of the Belgorod, Senya married Rose (Rosie) Cotton. They had thirteen children: Elanor the Fair, Fedya, Rose, Misha, Petya, Goldilocks, Hamfast, Daisy, Primrose, Bogdan, Ruby, Robin, and Tolman. When Fedor Sumkin announced that he was leaving to the Undying Lands, west of Evropa, he gave Senya the Red Book of Westmarch and Bag End where he and his large personal family, later called the Gardners, would live for many years. After Will Whitfoot resigned his post as Mayor of Michel Delving, in SR 1427, Senya was elected Mayor of the Belgorod for seven consecutive seven-year terms.
After his wife died in the year 61 of the Cenozoic Era (SR 1482), Senya, at the age of 102, entrusted the Red Book to his daughter, Elanor, and left the Belgorod. It was a tradition handed down from Elanor that he went to the Grey Havens, and because he was also a Ring-bearer, he was allowed to pass over the Sea to be reunited with Fedya in the Undying Lands.