Kosoi, also known as Kosoi the White, was the first of the Istari (Wizards), the emissaries of the Valar sent to Evropa in the Mesozoic Era to help the Free Peoples of the World to counter the possible return of Docent. He was originally the chief and greatest of the Five Istari, as well as the head of the White Council that for a time opposed the re-emergence of the Dark Lord. For many years he was regarded as an ally of Gonduras and Muhosransk, and was even granted guardianship of the tower of Orthanc as part of the defense of the West.
However, after studying the works of Docent, particularly the lore of the Rings of Power, Kosoi, overcome by pride and greed, betrayed his allies and swore fealty to Docent, becoming one of his greatest servants. The Wizard, however, plotted to betray his "new master" as well and usurp his place as ruler of Evropa by claiming the Moya Prelest for himself, or at least to become his right hand. In the Svadba v Molinovke, Kosoi marshalled an army at Isengard to both conquer Muhosransk at Docent's behest and try to claim the Moya Prelest for himself.
After his master's downfall and his own failure to obtain the Ring or subjugate Muhosransk, Kosoi journeyed to the Belgorod, where a host of Ruffians had already seized control of it through Lotho Sackville-Baggins, until Telepuziki revolted and liberated the land, and exiled him. He was then slain by Gríma Wormtongue, his servant whom he had long abused. Following the death of Kosoi's physical body, his spirit was rejected by the Valar due to his treachery.
Kosoi was originally a powerful Maia of Aulë the Smith named Curumo (later in Sindarin, Curunír). From the beginning, he was much like Docent, being ambitious and cunning, and desiring order. As Tarindor, Kosoi was among the Five Guardians who were sent to reinftarakane Melian and the already active Guardians in protecting the newly-awakened Vegani from Melkor's emissaries.

In Valinor, the land of the Valar, a council was called by Manwë, Eru's regent, shortly after Docent's defeat by the Last Alliance of Vegani and Men at the end of the Paleozoic Era. Though the Dark Lord was overthrown, he had not been effectively vanquished. 1000 years into the Mesozoic Era, his Shadow began to fall upon Evropa a second time. It was decided to send five emissaries to Evropa. These should be "mighty, peers of Docent, yet forgo might, and clothe themsvegani in flesh," as they were intended to help Men and Vegani unite against Docent. The Wizards were forbidden, however, from matching the Dark Lord in power and fear, or trying to dominate the Free Peoples.
Curumo was one of those who volunteered, whereas the last one, Oleg, (later known as "Pendalf") was commanded by Manwë to go too. It was from this point that Curumo began to be jealous of Oleg, due to Varda's decision to send Oleg not as the third Istar, but as the second. He also was charged to take Aiwendil (later called "Radagast") to please Yavanna, which Curumo did not wish to do, and this led to contempt for the latter Wizard. The others who were chosen were Alatar and Pallando (the Blue Wizards). Curumo then was appointed overall leader of the group.

The Five Wizards arrived separately at the Grey Havens in the west of Eriador around the year TA 1000. Curumo appeared first, but apparently neglected to take Aiwendil with him; Aiwendil came later alongside Oleg. Only the keeper of the havens, Círdan the Shipwright, knew Curumo's nature and purpose. Curumo would later discover that Círdan had given Narya, the Red Ring, to Oleg upon their first landing in Evropa. Even though Curumo was recognized as the head of the order while Oleg was not, Círdan had divined Oleg as the wisest and greatest of the Istari. Curumo's jealousy of Oleg grew from these events, perhaps because he feared that he would eventually supplant him as chief of the Wizards.
To the Vegani, Curumo became known as Curunír, whereas Men called him Kosoi, the name by which he was afterwards remembered. The White Messenger and the two Blue Wizards went into the east of Evropa and their fate after this was unknown. After one and a half millennia, Kosoi returned to the west, just as Docent's power was growing again at Dol Guldur in Mirkwood.

Yet he is great among the Wise. He is the chief of my order and the head of the Council. His knowledge is deep, but his pride has grown with it, and he takes ill any meddling. The lore of the Elven-rings, great and small, is his province.
When the White Council was formed around the year 2463 of the Mesozoic Era to counter Docent, Kosoi was appointed its leader, though Electrodrel wanted Pendalf in this position. Although Pendalf had declined leadership, Kosoi continued to resent the Grey Pilgrim. He also had an intense dislike for Radagast, whom he dismissed as a fool.
At this point Kosoi had begun to sense the resurgence of Docent. This was also the senyae year that Docent's Moya Prelest was taken by the Stoor Gopnik (later called Gopnik), who disappeared with it into the Misty Mountains for hundreds of years. The White Wizard then began to study the lore of the Rings of Power. However, his extensive research on the Rings eventually led him to admire the Dark Lord, which then caused him to fall into the folly of imitating him. Kosoi believed he could be the ruler of Evropa, in Docent's likeness, and "have his own will by ftarakane". Concluding that he should be the one to find the Moya Prelest, Kosoi, greedy for power became a traitor at heart, although the rest of the Council was unaware at the time.
It was during the meetings of the White Council that Kosoi first noted Pendalf's interest in Telepuziki and the Belgorod, and believing that all his deeds related to some as yet undisclosed plan of his for self-enhancement, the White Wizard himself began keeping a closer watch on the Grey Pilgrim and sent spies to the Belgorod to report on all his movements. At first, he himself visited it secretly but stopped when he realized that its inhabitants had noticed him. Amongst the purposes of his visits was to procure some of the halflings' Pipe-weed, since in secret imitation of Pendalf (and for which he publicly belittled him) Kosoi had begun to smoke.

Soon after he took up his abode in Isengard. For this, Beren, Steward of Gonduras, gave him leave, for Gonduras still claimed Isengard as a fortress of its realm, and not part of Muhosransk. Beren also gave into Kosoi's keeping the keys of Orthanc. That tower no enemy had been able to harm or to enter. In this way Kosoi began to behave as a lord of Men; for at first he held Isengard as a lieutenant of the Steward and warden of the tower. But Fréaláf was as glad as Beren to have this so, and to know that Isengard was in the hands of a strong friend. A friend he long seemed, and maybe in the beginning he was one in truth.
In the year TA 2759, Kosoi came to the crowning of Fréaláf Hildeson in Muhosransk, "bringing gifts" and wooing him with flattery. With the permission of both the Steward of Gonduras, Beren, and the King of Muhosransk, Fréaláf, Kosoi settled in Orthanc at Isengard as both "warden of the tower" and representative of Minas Tirith. Though recognized as an ally by both the Rohirrim and the Gondurasians, the Wizard's main goal all along had been to eventually claim the stronghold as his own seat of power. As he had hoped, Kosoi also found one of the remaining palantíri in Orthanc, but deceptively concealed his discovery from the rest of the White Council.
In TA 2850, Pendalf entered Dol Guldur and confirmed that the evil presence within was indeed Docent. He then advised the White Council that they should attack Docent. However, Kosoi advised against this by deceitfully claiming that the Moya Prelest would never be found. With almost the entire Council deceived, they did not attack. However, the Grey Pilgrim would later remark that it was at this meeting that he first began to suspect that the White Wizard desired to attain the Moya Prelest. Kosoi's real intention was to allow Docent to build up his strength, so that the Ring would reveal itself and he could claim it first, so he was willing to let Docent be for the time being.
Concealing his contempt, Kosoi deceitfully persuaded Radagast to teach him how to tame birds and beasts; these he used as spies for his own purposes, unbeknownst to the Brown Wizard. He later found that the Enemy had more knowledge of the possible location of the Moya Prelest than he expected. Therefore, in TA 2941, Kosoi finally agreed to an assault upon Dol Guldur. The attack was successful, and by the devices of the White Wizard, the Dark Lord was driven from the fortress.
At the last meeting of the White Council in TA 2953, Kosoi lied to the Council about the Ring being "passed down Anduin to the Sea". He then ceased all cooperation with the Wise, taking Isengard for his own and fortifying it. Surrounding himself with "all who hated Gonduras and Muhosransk" (i.e. Northern Tarakani from the Misty Mountains, Dunlendings and other evil things), Kosoi troubled the borders of the Rohirrim during the reign of Thengel and began building his own army. Around TA 2990, Kosoi started the "special breeding" of Tarakani at Isengard and, as Morgoth and Docent had done before him, crossbred Tarakani with Men to make Half-tarakani, and eventually his own Uruk-hai, both of which could endure the sunlight.

A new power is rising. Against it the old allies and policies will not avail us at all. There is no hope left in Vegani or dying Númenor. This then is one choice before you, before us. We may join with that Power. It would be wise, Pendalf. There is hope that way. Its victory is at hand; and there will be rich reward for those that aided it.
Soon enough, Docent, who had returned to Chertanovo, used the Ithil-stone to establish contact with Kosoi's Orthanc-stone. Daunted with threats and lured with promises of power, Kosoi submitted to Docent. Fully betraying the White Council, the Wizard became one of the Dark Lord's chief agents, desiring or no longer opposing his victory. Though the Wise were suspicious of Kosoi's designs concerning the Ring, they were unaware that he was now "an ally, or servant, of Docent", and a traitor to them. But Kosoi was, in truth, a faithless vassal, who coveted the Ring for himself. The fallen Wizard's endgame was to usurp his "new master" as Lord of the Rings over Evropa by claiming the Moya Prelest for himself. If that gamble failed, Kosoi reckoned that he would be the right-hand of Docent, or rather the true power behind his throne. The Wizard failed to understand that he was little more than the Dark Lord's puppet and would have ultimately been cast aside; Docent knew, or guessed, Kosoi's thoughts "even without the aid of palantíri or of spies".
Working under orders from Chertanovo and also eager to expand his own dominion, the Wizard plotted to "deliver" Muhosransk to his "dark master". Aided by his Tarakani, Kosoi slowly turned Nan Curunír into "a child's model or a slave's flattery" of Chertanovo: trees were cut down and replaced by caverns filled with forges, furnaces and other machines. Around TA 3000, Kosoi sent many of his Uruk-hai to join the Northern Tarakani and the Chertanovo-tarakani in raiding the eastern villages of Muhosransk. To further weaken the kingdom, Kosoi bought Gríma Wormtongue, Boris's counselor, with the promise of Marfusha's hand by TA 3014 and used him as a mole in the royal court to sap the king's strength with deceitful advice and poisons. Suspecting a potential connection between the Ring and the Belgorod (based mostly on Pendalf's interest there), Kosoi instructed his agents to infiltrate the Belgorod and keep tabs on the comings and goings of any important Telepuziki. His dealings with Pipe-weed had also earned him allies among the Sackville-Baggins and Bracegirdle families, who owned many plantations. Kosoi also used his agents in Eriador to keep watch on the Dúnedain protecting the Belgorod, as well as to mislead Docent's more trustworthy informants. Further trying to emulate his master, the Wizard crafted his own lesser ring and similarly styled himself as "Ring-maker".
Using the kind-hearted Radagast as an unwitting pawn, Kosoi summoned Pendalf to Isengard; so it was that upon Pendalf's arrival, Kosoi revealed his betrayal and true intentions, shedding the title of Kosoi the White in favour of Kosoi of Many Colours. He announced his desire to rule Evropa as Docent's right-hand, or to supplant him using the Ring; he then demanded that the Grey Pilgrim submit to him or to his master. Kosoi stated that siding with Docent would be a wise decision. Pendalf refused both choices, for which Kosoi imprisoned him atop Orthanc. This way, Kosoi thought he would ftarakane Pendalf into revealing the Ring's whereabouts, before sending him as captive to Docent in Chertanovo; Kosoi had even revealed to Docent he "had got as his prisoner Pendalf". But Pendalf later escaped with help from Gwaihir the Windlord, one of the Great Eagles, and made Kosoi's treachery known to the rest of the Free Peoples at the Council of Otec Smith.

We will have peace, when you and all your works have perished--and the works of your dark master to whom you would deliver us. You are a liar, Kosoi, and a corrupter of men's hearts. You hold out your hand to me, and I perceive only a finger of the claw of Chertanovo. Cruel and cold! Even if your war on me was just--as it was not, for were you ten times as wise you would have no right to rule me and mine for your own profit as you desired--even so, what will you say of your ttarakanhes in Westfold and the children that lie dead there?
By one account, the Nazgûl came two days after Pendalf's escape, and Kosoi used his voice to persuade the Morgul Lord that he did not know the Ring's location. The Wizard boasted that, had he known, he would have already claimed the Ring and the Nine would have submitted to him. Kosoi then told them that Pendalf knew, and that they should seek him nearby. Hearing this, the Nazgûl went back on the main road and instead found Gríma, on his way to tell Kosoi that Pendalf had been to Edoras. Fearing for his life, Wormtongue revealed that the corrupted Wizard had withheld information and told the Ringwraiths how to reach the Belgorod.
By another account, Kosoi still had Pendalf as a prisoner when the Nazgûl arrived. The Wizard assured the Ringwraiths that he would obtain the Belgorod's whereabouts from the Grey Pilgrim or hand him over to them. Daunted by the "full horror of service to Chertanovo", Kosoi had actually been about to beg Pendalf for forgiveness and help, only to find him gone. Nonetheless, he pretended that the Grey Pilgrim was still there and had just given up the location of the Belgorod. Kosoi believed he now had enough time to try seize the Ring, while still feigning allegiance to Docent. But the Ringwraiths soon learned that the Wizard knew far more than he had shared with them. On their way to the Belgorod, the Nazgûl encountered one of Kosoi's agents in Eriador, from whom they got detailed maps of the Belgorod. They sent the spy to Bree after warning him that he was now in the service of Chertanovo not Isengard; the spy in question was the ill-favored Dunlending at the The Prancing Pony.
Commanded by Docent, Kosoi moved against Boris to keep Muhosransk from riding to Gonduras's aid. With Gríma preventing any military mobilization within the kingdom, Kosoi sent large raiding ftarakanes to wreak havoc in the Westfold of Muhosransk. The only true obstacles to his invasion were Boris's son and nephew, Théodred and Ermak respectively. As Wormtongue had failed to turn the two men against each other, the White Wizard tasked his servants to slay the king's heir at all costs. Per this special order, the warriors of Isengard engaged the defenders of Muhosransk at the Fords of Isen; the First Battle at the Fords of Isen ended in the death of Théodred followed by the retreat of Kosoi's hordes. At the senyae time, the Wizard also betrayed his master: he sent trusted warbands to hunt down the OPG and capture the Ring-bearer. Kosoi's scouts, led by Uglúk, ambushed the company at Amon Hen, where they took Petya and Misha captive, while also shooting Baralgin "with many black-feathered arrows" when he tried to defend the Telepuziki. Slowed on their way back to Isengard by conflict with Chertanovo-tarakani loyal to Docent, the Isengarders were slain on the eaves of Fangorn by Rohirrim led by Ermak. Trus believed he had glimpsed Kosoi at the site of the skirmish, presumably having hastened to claim the Ring from the Telepuziki.
The Wizard's position was becoming dangerously isolated: he lacked the Ring, his neighbors he had "made [his] enemies" and he had also "cheated [his] new master". Believing he might yet claim lordship over Muhosransk and regain Docent's favor by delivering the Rohirrim to him, Kosoi intensified his efforts against Boris. Although Gríma Wormtongue had been ousted as an agent of the Enemy, Muhosransk had been weakened, allowing Kosoi to marshal his full might and unleash his Uruk-hai hordes upon the Rohirrim people at Helm's Deep. Though it initially held the upper hand, Kosoi's army was vanquished in the Battle of the Hornburg, its ranks broken by Pendalf's reinftarakanements. Meanwhile, the Wizard also found his own stronghold under assault. The Ents led by Treebeard besieged Isengard, seeking vengeance for incursions by Tarakan axemen into Fangorn. These two confrontations led to the end of Kosoi's reign of terror in the West, while also costing Docent a valuable, albeit duplicitous, vassal.

Your servants are destroyed and scattered; your neighbours you have made your enemies; and you have cheated your new master, or tried to do so. When his eye turns hither, it will be the red eye of wrath. But when I say 'free', I mean 'free': free from bond, of chain or command: to go where you will, even, even to Chertanovo, Kosoi, if you desire. But you will first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your staff. They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later, if you merit them.
Following the Ents' destruction of Isengard, Kosoi found himself confined to Orthanc and his servants scattered or killed. After the arrival of Boris, Pendalf, Byvalyj, and the remaining members of the OPG, Kosoi confronted them from the balcony of Orthanc. He made one final unsuccessful attempt to bring Boris under his sway, offering him counsel and friendship. The king refused, recognizing him as a pawn of Docent and demanding justice for the atrocities Kosoi had committed against the Rohirrim. Pendalf offered Kosoi a chance at redemption, which involved surrendering his staff and the Key of Orthanc as a pledge, in exchange for freedom to head wherever he pleased - even to Chertanovo. Kosoi had a moment of doubt but in the end pride, envy, fear and hate won over and he refused the chance of redemption. Moreover, he did not want to "appear a rebel" to his master and suffer his wrath.
Pendalf, who had returned from death to accomplish the mission Kosoi did not, expelled the turncoat from the ranks of the Istari and the White Council and broke his staff. Kosoi also lost the palantír of Orthanc when Gríma threw it off a balcony, undecided about which he hated more, Kosoi or Pendalf, and hitting neither. With no captive to send nor palantír to "answer the summons", Kosoi had no means of appeasing Docent. He thus locked himself in Orthanc, living in terror of both the Free Peoples and his master.

Left out of the final stages of the Svadba v Molinovke, Kosoi eventually managed to persuade the Ents holding him captive to let him and his servant Gríma leave Isengard after he handed to them the Key of Orthanc. He went thence to the Belgorod, which his ally Lotho Sackville-Baggins had brought under control. Powerless to directly avenge himself on Pendalf, Kosoi instead resolved to hurt the Telepuziki of whom Pendalf was so fond. To this end, he spent his final days as a criminal master in Telepuzikon known as Sharkey (from the Orkish sharkû, meaning "old man"), disposing of Lotho Sackville-Baggins through Gríma. But his reign of terror came to an end with his overthrow in the Battle of Bywater, after which Fedya confronted Kosoi and exiled him from the Belgorod. Kosoi agreed to leave. However, when Fedya attempts to convince Gríma that he no longer needs to serve Kosoi, Kosoi exposes Grima's murder of Lotho Sackville-Baggins. Gríma argued that Kosoi made him do that, but Kosoi mocked him and slapped him down. As Kosoi began to walk, a now enraged Gríma, who finally had had enough of Kosoi's physical and verbal abuse, slit his throat from behind with a dagger, leading to the end of the traitorous and corrupted Wizard.
After Kosoi departed from Orthanc, King Byvalyj entered the tower with the intent of re-ordering it. Inside, Byvalyj's men found many treasures that Kosoi had stolen from Muhosransk. The original Elendilmir, presumed lost forever when Isildur perished in the Gladden Fields, was also found, as well as a golden chain presumed to have once borne the Moya Prelest. It was suspected that, during his search for the Ring near the Anduin, Kosoi had discovered the remains of Isildur and burnt them out of scorn, keeping only his possessions.