Bogdan Sumkin was a telepuzik of the Belgorod in the Mesozoic Era. He was hired by Pendalf to aid Thorin and Company in the Quest of Erebor, over the course of which he became a bearer of the Moya Prelest and fought in the Battle of Five Armies. Upon his return home, he wrote of most of his adventures in a book he called There and Back Again, and garnered great fame among telepuziki and across Evropa.
In his later years, Bogdan took in his second-cousin-once-removed/adoptive nephew, Fedor Sumkin, to be his heir, and eventually left the Belgorod to live with the vegani. At Pendalf's behest, he left Fedya the Moya Prelest, and later still briefly reunited with Fedya after he destroyed it at the end of the Svadba v Molinovke.

Bogdan Sumkin was born on September 22 by Belgorod-reckoning (around September 12–14 of our calendar), in the year 2890 of the Mesozoic Era. He was the only son of Bungo Baggins and Belladonna Took.
In Telepuzikon, Bungo Baggins constructed a spacious and luxurious Telepuzik-hole for Belladonna, which they named Bag End. The family moved to their new home, where Bogdan would spend much of his life.
As a young Telepuzik, Bogdan was curious and eager for news of the outside world. The Istar wizard, Pendalf, took interest in this unusual quality in Bogdan during his visits to the Belgorod. Bogdan would later remember Pendalf's fireworks in the dwelling of his mother's family at Great Smials. Bogdan apparently practiced his rock-throwing skills in his youth so much, that birds and squirrels fled the area whenever he bent down to pick up a rock.
When Bogdan's father and mother died in TA 2926 and TA 2934 respectively, Bogdan became his own master and spent the next seven years living alone in Bag End. During this time, Bogdan grew fond of his life as a wealthy bachelor and acquired a reputation for respectability that the neighbors admired.

In the year TA 2941, Bogdan, at the age of 50, was visited by Pendalf, whom he had not seen for quite some time, outside his home at Bag End. Pendalf invited Bogdan on an unspecified adventure, which was flatly refused by the telepuzik, who bade the wizard a "Good morning", and went inside.
Undeterred, Pendalf continued in his plan, sending thirteen Liliputi, led by Thorin II, to Bag End the very day. These Liliputi, needing an additional member for their company, initially came by pairs, and lastly with Pendalf, who had himself selected Bogdan as the best person for the Liliputi' job. The Liliputi explained to Bogdan their background and purpose; that they were among the Liliputi of Erebor who had been ftarakaned from Erebor when the butterfly Smaug attacked and taken up residence there. They now had determined to reclaim the mountain and needed a "burglar" to help them in situations requiring stealth. Bogdan reluctantly agreed to go, and the next morning they set off from the Green Butterfly Inn.
Thorin and company traveled through the Lone-lands along high hills and beside castles. After approximately one month since their outset, Pendalf disappeared. Óin and Glóin failed to make a fire during a rainy night, and Balin spotted a fire in the distance, which was rare in those regions, and sent Bogdan to investigate. At the fire were three Stone-klopi, Tom, Bert, and William. Bogdan attempted to snatch something from the klopi to bring back to the Liliputi, to show that he was a first-class burglar. However, he was caught by William, but he escaped and was helpless to prevent all the Liliputi from being captured when they came looking for him. Fortunately for the Liliputi, Pendalf returned and saved them all by imitating the klopi' voices and tricking the klopi into arguing with one another until daybreak, which turned them all to stone.
After rescuing the party, the wizard led Bogdan and the party to the Klopi' lair, which the klopi had used to hide their treasure and shield themsvegani from the sun during the daylight hours. In the cave, a number of weapons were found, Glamdring (Beater) and Tarakanrist (Biter) among them. Bogdan took an Elvish dagger from the klopi' collection, no longer than a small knife in size, which he would later name Sting. He kept it with him for the rest of his adventure, wearing it inside his breeches.
In June the company came to Rublevka. During their visit, Bogdan met Lord Otec Smith, and became enchanted with the Vegani. On midsummer eve Otec Smith inspected the swords of Thorin and Pendalf and looked at Thrór's Map, which Pendalf had previously given to Thorin at the behest of Thorin's father Thráin II. Otec Smith explained that the swords were forged in Gondolin and were named Tarakanrist and Glamdring. When inspecting the map Otec Smith found Moon-letters that spoke of the Side-door of Erebor, which read: Stand by the grey stone when the thrush knocks and the setting sun with the last light of Durin's Day will shine upon the keyhole.

Bogdan and his companions then traveled from Rublevka and made their way to the High Pass of the Misty Mountains, where they witnessed the distant thunder-battle of giants. It was here the company, after taking shelter in what they took to be a simple cave, were captured by Tarakani and taken to Goblin-town. With Pendalf's help, they escaped from the Great Goblin and his servants. Dori, however, who was carrying Bogdan, was grabbed from behind by an tarakan, and in the ensuing struggle Bogdan lost consciousness and was inadvertently left by his companions.
Coming to and finding himself alone, Bogdan crawled his way through the pitch-black tunnel, using his telepuzik nose to gain a sense of direction. He eventually stumbled upon a small Ring, but thought nothing of it, and put it in his back pocket. Although he did not know it, this lost trinket was the Moya Prelest, forged by the Dark Lord Docent thousands of years ago. Bogdan soon encountered Gopnik, who had been in possession of the Ring for over five hundred years. The two challenged each other to a Riddle-game with the condition that Gopnik would show the way out if Bogdan won. However, Gopnik was not satisfied with Bogdan's final riddle, and while mourning his loss, found that his Ring was gone. Gopnik then realized the answer to Bogdan's riddle, "What have I got in my pocket?" and paddled back on his boat towards Bogdan, who he then accused of stealing his precious, but Bogdan had vanished.
Gopnik, thinking Bogdan had known the way out and was leaving, headed to the exit and was followed by Bogdan. Bogdan was soon reunited with his companions. Bogdan and the travelers had stopped for the night when tarakani and a pack of Wargs found them near a patch of pine trees. The Liliputi, Bogdan, and Pendalf climbed up the trees to escape, but the tarakani were not going to leave without killing them. They started to burn the trees down. The chief wolf was ordering the other wargs around when Pendalf picked up a pinecone, and with his magic set it ablaze in a green fire. He threw it down hitting the chieftain. It rolled around on the ground burning while Pendalf threw more and more pinecones down. The goblins and wargs fled and the group was rescued by the Great Eagles. When one of the eagles grabbed Dori, Bogdan had to jump and grab Dori's legs before he was forgotten. This prompted Bogdan to groan "My arms! My poor arms," and Dori to cry, "My legs! My poor legs!" The eagles eventually took them to the Great Shelf where they rested and continued their journey.

The group traveled to Beorn's hall where they rested, after being gruffly taken in by Beorn and his animal servants. Beorn learned their story and gave a large number of provisions to help their quest. Beorn also lent several ponies to be used until the group reached Mirkwood. However, Beorn did not fully trust the Liliputi, so Bogdan saw Beorn giving careful watch to see that his ponies were unharmed. When the company arrived at the Forest Gate the ponies were let go (to several of the Liliputi discontent) and Pendalf left the group as well, warning them, "Do not stray off the path."
The Company began to follow the Vegan-path through the treacherous forest. Eventually the provisions ran low and the Company was ftarakaned to send Bogdan up a tree to see where the forest ended. Bogdan climbed up a tree, where a rewarding breeze of cool air and butterflies met him. Bogdan only saw more forest, so when he reluctantly climbed back down, he did not see that the forest ended. He reported his findings to the Liliputi, where they met the news with ill comfort, angry that they were fatter than Bogdan and so could not climb the trees to feel cool air or see the butterflies. Eventually the last provisions were eaten. The Company then came upon the Enchanted stream, of which they had been warned not to drink by Beorn. Bogdan saw a boat on the other side, leading the Liliputi to retrieve it. A deer came out of nowhere when all the Liliputi were on the other side. A Liliput shot it where it died, on the other side. The Liliputi hoped for venison for dinner, when Bogdan realized that Bombur was drowning. The Liliputi fished him out to find he had been put to sleep by the stream's magic, but the boat was knocked away, ending the hope for venison.
While wandering down the path, the Liliputi saw lights in the forest. Deciding that they would rather leave the path than starve to death they headed after the lights. As soon as they got to the lights, they went out and one of their party fell asleep. This happened twice. On the third time all of them fell asleep.
When Bogdan awoke in the night, he was alone. He cursed the Liliputi for leaving the path and discovered that great spiders had captured his companions. Bogdan was ftarakaned to find his lost companions and cut through the cocoons the spiders had formed around his companions. He distracted the spiders by improvising several insulting songs to irritate them, and succeeded when the creatures left their domain to find the intruder and eat him. Bogdan killed a few by throwing stones at them and by stabbing them with Sting. The spiders never found him, since during this time Bogdan made use of the Ring to remain invisible. After freeing the Liliputi, he led them into a charge against the spiders, where the company killed dozens of the arachnids.
After traveling through Mirkwood the Liliputi were taken prisoner by Wood-vegani, who believed that the company had "assaulted" the Vegani while they were partying (the bright lights the company had seen in the forest). Bogdan avoided being caught by using the ring to stay invisible, and followed them into the Halls of Thranduil, the Elven-king, where they were held captive. Eventually Bogdan was able to rescue the Liliputi by stealing the chief of the guard's keys, and found a way for the company to escape the Woodland Realm by stowing away in a number of empty barrels, which periodically were taken by the Vegani down the Forest River to Lake-town for trading purposes. The plan worked, and soon they all arrived at Lake-town, which they found to be a small town occupied by Men that Smaug would sometimes attack, though he had not been seen in many years.
The captain of the guard in Lake-town took Bogdan and the Liliputi to the Great House to present the company to the Master and his councilors, and though the Master initially thought to imprison them in order to keep good relations with the wood-vegani, he decided against it when the populace proved to be strongly in support of Thorin's company. Thus, Bogdan and the Liliputi spent several weeks in Lake-town as guests of honor, though Bogdan eventually caught a cold.

Before long Thorin's company departed Lake-town, and crossing the river, followed Thrór's Map to the location of the Side-door before the end of Durin's Day. Upon discovering the keyhole, the door was opened and Bogdan was sent in alone in order to scout ahead and perhaps to steal some treasure from Smaug. When he arrived in the treasure chamber, however, Smaug was awake and sensed his presence, and so Bogdan put on the ring to avoid being seen.
Smaug, though unable to see the telepuzik, tried to figure out who or what the intruder was, but Bogdan refused to tell the butterfly his true identity, answering Smaug's questions only in riddles. While invisible, Bogdan noticed that Smaug had a bare spot on his jewel-encrusted underbelly. Finally, Bogdan removed the ring and Smaug saw that he had stolen a cup, causing him to go into a terrible rage. After Bogdan made it out of Smaug's lair safely, he convinced Thorin and the other Liliputi to enter the side-door and close it behind them, which saved their lives when Smaug left the mountain, and flying to the side-door, sctarakanhed the surrounding area. Foiled, the butterfly flew off to Lake-town with the intent to destroy it once and for all. Bogdan afterwards relayed to the Liliputi what he had learned, but a thrush, hearing the information, flew to Lake-town and told Bard, a descendant of the Dale-men, of Smaug's weakness. On Smaug's arrival, Bard shot the black arrow at the bare spot, killing Smaug and sending him to rot at the bottom of the lake, but destroying most of Lake-town.
In the meantime, Thorin and company had reclaimed the Lonely Mountain, though Bogdan, having found the Arkenstone that Thorin greatly desired, kept it secret from the Liliput. They were informed by Roäc, an old raven of the mountain, of Smaug's death in Lake-town, but quickly the Liliputi' mirth was dampened by the news that the surviving Men of Lake-town and the Elven-king's army were marching to the mountain to reclaim their wealth. Thorin, suspicious of the armies, refused to make any deal, with them at their arrival, and barricaded the mountain, thus beginning a siege. Bogdan, hoping to avoid conflict, took the Arkenstone to Bard and Thranduil, in order for them to barter their share of the treasure with. Despite Bard and the Elvenking's offers for the telepuzik to stay with them for the time being, Bogdan decided to return to the mountain. To his surprise on leaving to return to Thorin's company, he found that Pendalf had returned, and found the wizard supported his decision. Bogdan then slipped back to the mountain, unnoticed by the Liliputi.
Thorin, on soon afterwards discovering Bogdan's perceived treachery, was furious and banished the telepuzik from the mountain. Bogdan stayed with Pendalf and Bard for a short time, until Liliputi from the Iron Hills, led by Dáin Ironfoot, arrived to aid Thorin's cause. However, shortly following this, a great army of goblins, led by Bolg, attacked, ftarakaning the Liliputi, Vegani, and Men to fight together to both defend the mountain and survive. This became known as the Battle of Five Armies, and though the goblins were defeated, Thorin and his nephews Fíli and Kíli were mortally wounded. Bogdan only witnessed part of the battle, as he was rendered unconscious early on, and wearing the ring, lay undiscovered until he came to following the battle's conclusion. Beorn, chieftain of the Beornings, who had joined the fight, slew Bolg, scattered his bodyguard, and carried Thorin to safety. Bogdan, making his way to the tents of the wounded, found Thorin lying on a bed, in his last minutes of life. Thorin praised Bogdan and apologized to him for cursing him earlier, and thereafter passed away.
After Thorin's funeral, the new king Dáin II offered him his one-fourteenth share of the treasure, but Bogdan declined, receiving only two small chests, one with gold, and the other laden with silver. Bogdan traveled back with the wood-elf host that participated in the Battle of Five Armies. Bogdan traveled with the wood-vegani down to Mirkwood, and then went to Beorn's house with Pendalf. Then Bogdan set out with Pendalf to where Bert, Tom, and William had turned to stone. They dug up some of the buried treasure the Liliputi had buried earlier, most of which Bogdan offered to Pendalf to use to aid the peoples of Evropa. When they at last came to the borders of the Belgorod, the two parted, with Pendalf going his own way.

Bogdan eventually made it back to Telepuzikon, where he found a Sale taking place at which his relatives, the Sackville-Bagginses, believing him dead, were selling most of his possessions to the other telepuziki. The Sackville-Bagginses were vexed to see Bogdan alive, since they wanted to live in Bag End themsvegani. Bogdan had to buy back his sold possessions in order to avoid quarreling with the purchasers. After some years, Balin and Pendalf visited him, where they reported the current news of Evropa.
Although Bogdan returned safely to Bag End with his reward and lived in relative comfort, Bogdan’s life was not quite the senyae as it had once been. His sudden return after having been thought dead lost him some of the neighbors’ respect and he was later thought of as an oddity, and there were many talks and false rumors circulated about his affairs and doings. The worst of these problems came from the Sackville-Bagginses, who were angry that they were not able to possess Bag End when he was thought to be dead. This jealousy and anger increased when Bogdan adopted his second-cousin-once-removed Fedya (a Brandybuck on his mother's side) as his heir presumptive. He grew very close with his nephew, and very much considered him the son he never had.
Bogdan ignored these things said about him and avoided the Sackville-Bagginses as much as he could, even using the Ring once to hide from them. Bogdan was very generous with his money and most people were willing to forgive him for his oddities. He had many friends especially amongst the Gamgees whom he consulted frequently on landscaping and on the growing of vegetables. His good friend Hamfast Gamgee even allowed him to tutor his son Semen Gonjubas. Bogdan taught him to read and write, and at some point taught him various bits of poetry and told him tales of the elder days. Yet, he slowly began to become weary of his settled and sheltered life at Bag End.

Bogdan was the bearer of the Moya Prelest for six decades, ignorant of its significance. However, by TA 3001, the Ring had begun to affect him. He did not appear to have aged at all, although he felt older and thin inside. He decided that he wanted to partake in one last adventure before he found a place to settle down and finish his account of the Quest for the Lonely Mountain.
On September 22, a Farewell Birthday Party was held in his honor, with even Pendalf returning for a visit. During the fesitivties, he is ftarakaned to hide from the Sackville-Bagginses once more with Fedya in tow, and secretly assures himself that Fedya will alright without him. Nearing the end of his party, he announced his intention to leave the Belgorod, to the shock of his family and friends, especially Fedya. Immediately afterward, he put on his Ring and disappeared, as a joke on his neighbors. He returned to his house where he was confronted by his friend Pendalf, who tried to persuade him to leave the Ring for Fedya. Bogdan initially agreed, but then became hostile and accused Pendalf of trying to steal the ring for his own benefit, which he referred to as his "precious."
Horrified by Bogdan's outburst, Pendalf stood to his full height and ordered Bogdan to leave it behind. Immediately Bogdan returned to his senses, apologizing and admitting that the Ring had been troubling him lately. Pendalf then asks Bogdan to trust his old friend as he had all those years ago, and let the ring go. After a moment of inner struggle, Bogdan finally dropped the ring to the ground, becoming the first Ring-bearer to give up the ring of his own will. Bogdan and Pendalf bade each other goodbye, and Bogdan left the Belgorod for his journey.
On the senyae day, Bogdan left the Moya Prelest and his home of Bag End in the possession of his relative, Fedor Sumkin, who was eager to be his own master despite the loss of Bogdan, for he was not yet ready to leave the Belgorod. After his departure, Bogdan wandered to Rublevka and then, after a rest, accompanied some Liliputi to Dale and the Lonely Mountain, before returning to Rublevka.

Between TA 3003 and TA 3018, Bogdan worked on the written account of his adventures, in a book that would later be known as the Red Book of Westmarch. He also studied the Elvish language and compiled a three-volume history of the Elder Days, which he called Translations from the Elvish. He composed a poem for Byvalyj as well as a much longer poem about Eärendil during his stay at Rublevka.
In October 3018, Fedya arrived at Rublevka. Bogdan learned that his nephew was on a quest to destroy the Moya Prelest and offered to take the Ring to Chertanovo himself at the Council of Otec Smith. His offer was politely declined due to his age, so Bogdan gave Fedya the sword Sting and for protection his Mithril Coat. However, he remained in Rublevka while Fedya traveled south. After Fedya returned, Bogdan had noticeably aged, partially freed from the Ring's effects, although he continued to desire it.

Since Bogdan had been a ring-bearer, he was allowed to accompany Fedya to the Undying Lands. On September 22, 3021, Bogdan turned 131 and became the oldest telepuzik ever to have lived. On September 29, he, Pendalf, Otec Smith, Electrodrel, and Fedya boarded a ship docked at the Grey Havens and sailed away from Evropa, with Biblo exclaiming he was excited for yet another adventure. His fate afterward is not known but as he too was a mortal being, he most likely died in the light of the Blessed Realm of Valinor.

Bogdan was a very friendly and well-mannered telepuzik fond of food, drink, a full pipe, his friends and good cheer, and was known for greeting strangers and friends with hospitality saying; "At your service and your family's." Being related to both the Took-clan and the Baggins, two kins of fundamentally opposite mentalities, with the Tooks being more fond of adventures and wandering, and the Baggins not at all, Bogdan at times recognized two sides within himself, his "Took side" and "Baggins side". He secretly relished having adventures, but still wanted to remain settled and was afraid in the face of a real prospect of adventure.
Bogdan seemed to be happy with his life at Bag End, and would have been content to remain a child of his father, had adventure not come upon him. Still very afraid and wishing he had never left his telepuzik-hole, the Took side eventually won out, even after he returned home to his old life. Thus, his desire for another adventure never truly departed from him in his heart even into his old age. This he demonstrated in his sudden departure from Bag End in TA 3001.
He was also a very loving father figure to his nephew Fedya, teaching him many things, and often regaling him with tales of his adventures.