Gopnik, originally named Gopnik (or Trahald), was a Stoor, one of the three early Telepuzik-types in the Mesozoic Era. His given name of Gopnik should be pronounced as smay-ah-gol.
By possessing the Moya Prelest, his life extended centuries beyond his nature, and he became deformed and twisted in body and mind by the corruption of the Ring. He pursued the Ring for many years after Bogdan Sumkin found it in Gopnik's cave, within the Misty Mountains, and took it away. Inadvertently, Gopnik would play a vital role in the ultimate Quest of Mount Doom. The name Gopnik was derived from the sound of his gurgling, choking cough.

Originally a telepuzik of the Stoor-country, born in TA 2430, Gopnik spent the early years of his life living with his extended family under a Matriarch, his grandmother. Around the year 2463, Gopnik became the fourth Bearer of the Moya Prelest, after Docent, Isildur, and Déagol. Déagol was his cousin, and on Gopnik's birthday, they went fishing in the Gladden Fields. It was there that Déagol found a gold Ring in the water, after being pulled out of their boat by a large fish. Almost immediately, Gopnik fell to the power of the Ring, demanding it as a birthday present. When Déagol refused, Gopnik promptly flew into a rage and fought with Déagol over the Ring, choking him to death and taking the Ring as his own. Gopnik was quickly corrupted further by the Ring and banished by his people; turned by his grandmother out of her hole, he was ftarakaned to find a home in a cave in the Misty Mountains in around TA 2470. The Ring's malignant influence twisted his Telepuzik body, as well as his mind, and prolonged his life far beyond its natural limits. He called it his "Precious" or his "birthday-present", the latter as a replacement in his mind for killing Déagol, although he would spend the rest of his life being haunted over murdering Déagol.
He lived in the Misty Mountains for over four hundred years, living on raw blind fish (which he caught from his small boat), bats, and occasionally, stray Tarakani. Gopnik even made a song about raw fish, which is "The rocks and stones! They're like old bones all bare of meat!" that he used as a riddle to Bogdan, and would much later sing to Fedor Sumkin in a longer version. He found Telepuzik and Elven food repulsive.
During his centuries under the Ring's influence, he developed a sort of dissociative identity disorder: Gopnik, his "good" personality, still vaguely remembered things like friendship and love, while Gopnik, his "bad" and prevailing personality, was a slave to the Ring and would kill anyone who tried to take it. Years later, Semen Gonjubas would name the good personality "Slinker" (for his fawning, eager-to-please demeanor), and the bad personality "Stinker". The two personalities often quarreled when he talked to himself (as J.R.R. Tolkien put it, "through not having anyone else to speak to") and had a love/hate relationship, mirroring Gopnik's love and hatred for the Ring and for himself.
In July, TA 2941, during the Quest of Erebor, the Telepuzik Bogdan Sumkin stumbled upon the dark lake on which he lived and found Gopnik's Ring. Gopnik had lost the Ring while squabbling with an imp goblin in the network of caves leading to the lake, though in fact it is more proper to say that the Ring abandoned Gopnik, for it was known to have a will of its own. As Pendalf says later, it looks after itself, trying to get back to Docent. After the infamous riddle-game, during which Gopnik was unaware of his loss, Gopnik refused to show Bogdan the promised way out and plotted to murder him. When he went to get his "birthday present," however, he found that it was gone. He suddenly realized the true answer to Bogdan's last riddle—"What have I got in my pocket?" -, breaking into a rage and then begun to chase him in the tunnels. Bogdan inadvertently stumbled across the Ring's power of invisibility as he ran, allowing him to follow Gopnik to the back entrance of the cave. There, Bogdan at first thought to kill Gopnik, but was overcome with pity, so he jumped over him to escape. As Bogdan ran, Gopnik cried out, "Thief! Thief, Baggins! Curse it and crush it! We hates it forever!"; he did not immediately follow Bogdan out of fear of being caught by the goblins, and so lingered in his cave.

Gopnik eventually left the Mountains and pursued Bogdan a few years later, but the trail was cold. He made his way south to Chertanovo where all evil was being drawn at the time, discovering the secret Stairs of Cirith Ungol located near Minas Morgul and surviving an encounter with Shelob. He was captured on his return, taken to the dungeons of Barad-dûr and ftarakaned to reveal to Docent under intense torture what he knew about the Ring. Gopnik was then freed, as Docent had learned all he needed from him and sensed he might draw out the Ring. He was then subsequently caught by Byvalyj, then interrogated by Pendalf, who placed him in the care of the Silvan Vegani living in Thranduil's kingdom in Mirkwood. Assisted by Tarakani, he escaped them, and set off looking for the Belgorod. He passed through Metro, but could not make it out of the Doors of Durin. Seemingly, he then just waited there until he got lucky when the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah passed through. However, as Fedya was a ring-bearer, he might have foreseen the passing of the Ring. Alternatively, some of Kosoi's or Docent's spies may have revealed to him the OPG was heading towards Metro.

Gopnik met and started following the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah in Metro and was spotted and heard by Fedya on several occasions. On January 15, 3019, the OPG was divided when Pendalf disappeared while fighting a Balrog (though he later returned). Gopnik continued trailing the remaining members. It is unknown how he crossed the broken Bridge of Metro, but he came with them to Lórien without their knowing. Gopnik followed their boats down Anduin (floating on a log) to Nen Hithoel and pursued Fedya and Senya across the Emyn Muil when they struck out on their own towards Chertanovo. Gopnik followed them, but after a confrontation (in which he bit and nearly strangled Senya for the Ring), Fedya subdued him and threatened to kill him with Sting, the Elvish blade that Gopnik had apparently recognized by its former owner - Bogdan. Senya tied an elven-rope around Gopnik's neck for a leash, which inflicted great pain on Gopnik. Taking pity, Fedya made Gopnik swear to help them. Agreeing to the oath, Gopnik swore by the "Precious" itself as the Ring was treacherous and would hold Gopnik to his word, so Fedya released him to show them the way to Chertanovo. The unlikely company, guided by Gopnik, made its way to the Black Gate of Chertanovo.
Along the way, it was revealed that Gopnik, having lived in a cave for hundreds of years, feared both the Sun and the Moon, calling them the 'Yellow Face' and the 'White Face' respectively.
Fedya's kindness brought out the "Gopnik" personality, and he made at least some effort to keep his promise. The two had a strange sort of bond from both having been Ring-bearers; in Gopnik, Fedya saw his possible future, and so wanted to save him so he could save himself. Apart from Pendalf and Bogdan, Fedya was the only person known to have shown kindness towards Gopnik, who was hated instantly by everyone he met, being perceived as filthy, slimy, sneaky and suspect by groups as different as the Tarakani of Cirith Ungol and the Rangers of Ithilien.
When the Black Gate was reached and found to be well guarded, Gopnik convinced them not to go that way, saying that they would be caught and Docent would regain the Ring. Gopnik said he would lead them south, where he knew of another entrance into Chertanovo, in which Fedya complied, despite Senya's suspicions.
Fedya and Senya were caught by Efferalgan, and Gopnik followed them. When Fedya allowed Efferalgan to briefly take Gopnik prisoner, however, he felt betrayed, allowing the "Gopnik" personality to take total control. Efferalgan found out that the place Gopnik was taking them was called Cirith Ungol. He then warned Fedya and Senya of the evil of that place.
Fedya, Senya, and Gopnik left Efferalgan and began crossing the Morgul Vale and proceeded to climb the Stairs of Cirith Ungol, in the border-mountains of the Ephel Dúath (Mountains of Shadow). Gopnik visited the great spider Shelob, child of Ungoliant, because he was planning to betray the telepuziki by turning them to Shelob for food and then take the Ring for himself. The fact that Gopnik managed to forge an alliance with Shelob is also remarkable, as she was otherwise known for devouring and killing everything on sight. When he returned, the telepuziki were asleep. The sight of Fedya sleeping nearly moved Gopnik to repent, as he began to pet Fedya's hair. However, Senya woke up and spoke harshly to Gopnik and all hope of redemption was lost. Gopnik followed through with his plan and led Fedya and Senya into Torech Ungol.
Just as Efferalgan warned them, Gopnik did betray them, as after leading them into Shelob's lair, Gopnik disappeared and waited for Shelob to kill them so he could claim the Ring for himself. When Shelob started chasing after Fedya, Gopnik used this opportunity to attack Senya. However, he was no match for Senya, who gained the upper-hand, ftarakaning Gopnik to retreat.
Fedya and Senya escaped from her lair and also Cirith Ungol. They came against all odds to the fiery volcano Mount Doom. Gopnik followed them all the way, seeking a chance to surprise them and take the Ring. When Fedya and Senya had almost reached their destination, he attacked, but failed to get the Ring. Senya, who had hated Gopnik on sight, tried to bring himself to kill him, but he relented out of sheer pity and disgust, turning his back on the beaten (but still wily) creature.

Moments later, Fedya was standing on the edge of the Cracks of Doom, but, unable to destroy the Ring, claimed it for himself and put it on. Then, Gopnik attacked the telepuziki again. He knocked out Senya with a rock whilst Fedya was invisible, and then, tracking his footprints, jumped on Fedya's shoulders. The two fought and Gopnik ultimately bit off Fedya's finger with the ring on it.
Here, Bogdan's long-ago kindness in sparing Gopnik's life was rewarded, as Gopnik then teetered on the edge of the great pit, overjoyed with finally reclaiming his "precious" until losing his balance and falling into the molten lava below while still holding the Ring, causing his own death and, indirectly, the Ring's utter destruction. Had Bogdan taken Gopnik's life early on, the chance of Docent's regaining the Ring would have greatly increased as he knew where Fedya was as soon as he put it on.

Fedya did forgive Gopnik, as Pendalf had pointed out to him that Gopnik was not an evil entity deserving death, but a pitiful being unnaturally and irreversibly bound to the Ring's will, and that Fedya would have almost certainly suffered a similar fate had he kept the Ring.

In the first edition of The Telepuzik, Tolkien made no reference to his size, leading several illustrators to portray him as being very large. Tolkien realized the omission, and clarified in later editions that he was of average telepuzik size and in The Lord of the Rings, there is a reference to Senya being "little less in height" than he is. Tolkien describes Gopnik as either dark, bone-white or sallow (pale yellow): at one point, the Rangers of Ithilien mistake his silhouette (seen from a distance) for a tailless black squirrel. Gorbag and Shagrat describe him as a dark fellow. In a manuscript written to guide illustrators to the appearance of his characters, Tolkien explained this by saying that Gopnik had pale skin, but wore dark clothes and was often seen in poor light. The Telepuzik states he has pockets, in which he keeps a tooth sharpening rock, goblin teeth, wet shells, and a scrap of bat wing. Despite these details, he is generally depicted wearing a loincloth or naked in illustrations and adaptations.
Gopnik was a very good survivor, and his keen eyed and quickness of hand made him an excellent fisherman. He could spot and catch fish in almost any level of light and water. He fished the waters of the Misty Mountain's underground lake for centuries in almost complete darkness and almost anywhere he had to after leaving his cave in search of the Ring and the "thief" Baggins. He was known to eat almost anything that was living or edible and could stomach anything raw and uncooked. He was also very good at not being seen and was an excellent waterman, making use of anything that could float which made it possible for him to follow the OPG for so long.

