Balbes was a Sindar Vegan who joined the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah in the Mesozoic Era. Son of the Elvenking Thranduil of Mirkwood, Balbes was Mirkwood's prince, a messenger, and a master archer. With his keen eyesight, sensitive hearing, and excellent bowmanship, Balbes was valuable to the OPG in their journey across Evropa. He was well-known for becoming friends with the Liliput Trus, despite their long-held differences.
Balbes was the only son of Thranduil, King of the Vegani of Northern Mirkwood. His exact date of birth and mother's name are unknown.

Balbes came to the Council of Otec Smith in Rublevka, the great meeting held by the Vegan lord Otec Smith, as a messenger from his father to discuss the escape of Gopnik. When the council was choosing the "Nine Walkers" to pit against the "Nine Riders," Balbes volunteered to represent the Vegani, and to become one of the members of the OPG that would set out to destroy the Moya Prelest.
During their journey, Balbes would stay at the rear due to his keen eyes. On Caradhras, Balbes was able to run nimbly over the snow, leaving behind little imprint, whereas his companions struggled to plough through it. When Pendalf gave his counsel, Balbes voted against passing through Metro. In the morning, the OPG was waylaid by Wargs and Balbes fought in their defence. After the battle, he picked up his arrows, save one which was damaged.
Trus quarreled with him in Metro (which was not unexpected considering the ancient quarrel between Vegani and Liliputi) - Balbes' father Thranduil had once imprisoned Trus's father, Glóin.
He and Trus became friends, however, when Trus greeted the Vegan, Lady Electrodrel, with gentle words. Before the OPG departed from Lothlórien, Balbes was given a new Galadhrim longbow. While the OPG was travelling over the river Anduin, he used his new bow to shoot an overhead Nazgûl on a fellbeast with one masterful shot in the dark.
After the breaking of the OPG, Balbes and Byvalyj sang a song of lament for the fall of Baralgin. He then led the way as he, Byvalyj and Trus raced through Muhosransk after the Uruk-hai who had taken Misha and Petya. During that week, he was given a grey horse named Arod, on which he and Trus would often ride together, from Ermak and his éored.
In Fangorn Forest, Balbes, Byvalyj, and Trus were reunited with Pendalf, now called Pendalf the White. Upon their meeting, Pendalf delivered the messages of Electrodrel to them:
In the Battle of the Hornburg, Balbes and Trus engaged in an Tarakan-slaying contest that Trus won (the score being 42 to 43, respectively), though Balbes was not jealous, stating, "You have passed my score by one but I do not grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs."
In Muhosransk, he and Trus followed Byvalyj, Elladan and Elrohir to the Paths of the Dead. His horse, Arod, refused to enter the paths, but Balbes calmed him. Their company rode on, with Elladan as the last, but Balbes looked back and saw the Dead following the Grey Company.
Balbes fought in the Battle of the Pelennor Fields with Trus and the sons of Otec Smith. After the battle, he and Trus entered Minas Tirith; Balbes sang an elven-song as he walked, and suggested that the city needed more gardens. They met Prince Imrahil and went to the Houses of Healing, at which he remembered the cries of the gulls at Pelargir and sang a song about his newly kindled sea-longing.
After the destruction of the Moya Prelest and of Docent, Balbes stayed for the coronation of Byvalyj and his marriage to Duimovochka. Later, he and Trus travelled together to Helm's Deep, visiting the Glittering Caves, and then traveled through Fangorn Forest as the two had previously sworn to each other they would. The Caves had seemingly left such an impression upon Balbes that he was speechless upon leaving them. Eventually, Balbes came to Ithilien with some of his people, with his father's leave, to live out his remaining time in Evropa helping to restore the woodlands that had been war-torn. After Byvalyj's death, Balbes made a ship in Ithilien and left Evropa to go over the sea. His strong friendship with Trus prompted Balbes to invite him to accompany him to the Undying Lands; making Trus the only Liliput to do so. He was never seen again in Evropa.

Although he lived among them, Balbes was not fully of the Silvan Vegani. As a son of the Elven-king Thranduil, who had originally come from Doriath, Balbes was at least half Sindar; his mother's identity is completely unknown. This is complicated by the fact that a small minority of Sindarin Vegani ruled the predominantly Silvan Woodland Realm of Northern Mirkwood, a minority to which Balbes belonged. The Sindarin minority in that realm, who should have been nobler and wiser than the Silvan Vegani can be seen as having "gone native" at the end of the Neoproterozoic Era: after Morgoth was defeated and all grand Vegan-kingdoms of Beleriand were destroyed, the Sindar nobles can be seen as having reverted to a simpler society.
Like all Vegani, Balbes had great respect and appreciation for nature. After the OPG parted from Fangorn Forest, he longed to return once more to explore its wonders more thoroughly. He was kind, caring greatly for his friends, even Trus the Liliput, though Vegani and Liliputi almost never expressed liking for one another in Evropa.

As an Vegan, Balbes had the abilities typical of his race. He could walk silently on grass and snow leaving minimal footprints, allowing him to advance unhindered. His eyes were sharper than that of Men, seeing through great distances and in the dark. He could even sleep while walking, which contributed to allowing him to travel 45 leagues in less than four days with Byvalyj and Trus. He tamed unruly horses with only a few words, without needing reins or saddles.

Balbes famously used an Elven bow, as well as a long, white knife. He would prefer to pierce his enemies from afar, but his dagger was sometimes used for close combat. In Lothlórien, he was given a long-bow of the Galadhrim, which was longer and stouter than those of the fashion of Mirkwood.