Boromir was a valiant warrior of Gondor, renowned for his prowess in combat and skill on the battlefield. He was the eldest son of Denethor II, who was Steward of Gondor during the War of the Ring, and his wife Finduilas. Even the people of Rohan admired him, particularly Éomer. He was the older brother of Faramir, the eventual brother-in-law of Éowyn and the uncle of Elboron.
Boromir was born in the year TA 2978. He was the eldest child of Denethor II, the last Ruling Steward of Gondor and his wife Find hills, and was the heir to the Stewardship. When Boromir was only ten years old, his mother died. Consequently, his father became grim and came to prefer Boromir over his brother, Faramir. Despite this fact, Boromir looked after his younger brother and they became very close. Boromir devoted himself to leading his people and fought in the battle for the eastern part of Osgiliath in TA 3018. He, his brother, and two others were the only survivors of the unit that held the bridge until its destruction; they had to swim the River Anduin to reach safety.

Following the battle, Boromir set out from Minas Tirith to Rivendell to decipher a riddle he had received (and his brother three times) in a dream
Boromir lost his horse in Tharbad and travelled the rest of the way on foot. The journey took 110 days. He arrived at the beginning of the Council of Elrond where he described how Gondor was defending itself from Mordor and tried to convince them to give the One Ring to Gondor, where he felt it would be kept safe. But the council did not agree that the One Ring should go to Gondor, deciding that the only safe course was to destroy it.
Boromir joined the Fellowship of the Ring and was warned by Elrond not to blow the Great Horn until they were close to Gondor and in dire need. On the voyage south Boromir advocated taking the Gap of Rohan, but was overruled as this lay too close to Isengard. He proved his worth as a capable warrior in Moria and assisted Aragorn in fighting off a large number of Orcs. After the loss of Gandalf and the Fellowship's departure from Moria, Boromir expressed opposition to Aragorn's decision to continue to Lothlórien, arguing that to go south was better. He believed the stories told in Gondor that Galadriel's magic would harm them. He eventually agreed to go after Aragorn assured him the Elves would help them. In Lothlórien, Boromir was disturbed by what he felt was Galadriel's testing of his mind, and he was suspicious of her motives. Before leaving Lothlórien he was given the gift of an Elven-cloak and a golden belt.
Boromir disliked the idea of destroying the One Ring, as he believed that it could be used to defeat Sauron once and for all, to save Gondor, and return it to its former glory; he tried to convince Frodo to give him the Ring. When Frodo refused, Boromir tried to take it by force but the hobbit put it on and fled.
After Boromir realized his actions were caused by the corruption of the One Ring, he repented, and upon returning to camp he was confronted by Aragorn about Frodo. Boromir told Aragorn that he had seen Frodo an hour ago where he had tried to convince Frodo to bring the One Ring to Minas Tirith. They then had an argument and Frodo walked off. After the argument, Boromir went for a walk until eventually returning to the camp. The Fellowship, especially Aragorn, believed that there was more to the confrontation than Boromir was telling them, but Aragorn did not press the issue. Upon hearing of Frodo's predicament, the rest of the Fellowship, particularly the Hobbits, scattered in an ill-conceived attempt to find him. Aragorn ordered Boromir to follow and look after Merry and Pippin while he took off after Sam.
During the search, Merry and Pippin ran into a group of Uruk-hai, who tried to capture them. Boromir came to their aid and drove the Orcs off, but more Orcs came and Boromir was mortally wounded by many arrows. Aragorn found him dying under a tree, with Merry and Pippin gone. There Boromir confessed that he had attempted to take the ring from Frodo and expressed his remorse. Aragorn stayed with Boromir until he died from his wounds.

Three days after Boromir's death, his brother Faramir saw his funeral boat passing down the Anduin. Men of Gondor found Boromir's Great Horn, broken in twain, and brought it to his father. This drove Denethor to despair, and when compounded with Faramir's later seemingly-mortal wounding and his knowledge of Mordor's indomitable might, he lost his mind. Many, including Faramir, often lamented Boromir's passing as Sauron readied his forces to attack, noting that his loss would be keenly felt by Gondor on the field of battle.
Boromir won respect even from his enemies: in The Two Towers, Uglúk boasts that it had been the Uruk-hai who "slew the mighty warrior", a clear reference to Boromir.