Dragons were ancient, intelligent, powerful creatures, as feared as they were admired in Middle-earth.
Dragons lived throughout the First, Second, and Third ages of Middle-earth and may have lived longer. They were originally bred by Morgoth during the First Age to serve as powerful war beasts. The first dragon ever seen in Middle-earth was Glaurung, titled as the Great Worm and the Father of Dragons, whom Morgoth used to great effect during the fourth and fifth battles in the War of the Great Jewels. Glaurung had four legs and breathed fire, though he was wingless and lacked the ability to fly. Like most of the creatures made or twisted by Morgoth, Dragons were capable of reproducing independently. Dragons were sometimes referred to as Great-Serpents, Long-Worms, or simply Drakes, with the first two specifying the Serpent-like Dragons. In the First Age, the greatest heirloom of the House of Hador was the Dragon-helm of Dor-lómin, a helm of great weight that had as its crest an image of Glaurung's head. After Glaurung, even mightier dragons were bred to serve Morgoth. The largest and most powerful dragon to ever live was Ancalagon the Black, who led his kind in the final charge against the Valar in the War of Wrath at the close of the First Age. Most of Morgoth's dragons, including Ancalagon, were killed in this battle. However, some survived and fled eastward to the Northern Waste of the remaining Middle-earth, where, in later years, they would slowly multiply.
Dragons in the Second Age and Third Age were a blight upon the Dwarves and all those who hoarded treasure. Some like Smaug the Golden and Scatha the Worm, went from the Withered Heath where they had bred and invaded Dwarven kingdoms. Some peoples of Men were driven from their lands as well in the northeast, before the last centuries of the Third Age, by certain dragons among whom was Smaug.
It is presumed that after the death of Smaug in the Third Age, the great dragons became extinct. According to Gandalf, the fire-drake race survived until at least just before the War of the Ring, and some lesser kin survived even after the war. It may have been possible that some races of dragon still existed into the Fourth Age.
There was an inn in the Shire called The Green Dragon, and a type of flower and firework called a Snap Dragon. For Bilbo Baggins' 111th birthday, Gandalf made a special dragon firework.