The Fellowship of the Ring was formed as a brotherhood and expeditionary group consisting of representatives from each of the Free Peoples of the World near the end of the Third Age. Its purpose was to escort the bearer of the One Ring to Mordor so that it might be cast into the fires of Mount Doom, the mountain in which it was forged, so that it would be destroyed and ultimately eradicate the Dark Lord Sauron.
The Fellowship was also known as the Company of the Ring, the Nine Walkers, or simply the Company. Each of the members of the Company were representatives of their respective races, with Legolas and Gimli being the only Elf and Dwarf chosen, respectively.

Formed at the Council of Elrond in 3018 of the Third Age, the Fellowship consisted of nine members: four Hobbits, two Men, one Elf, one Dwarf, and a Wizard. It was the only known organisation ever formed in the history of Middle-earth to hold members of each of these races within it (and with the departure of the Elves and the Wizards from Middle-earth, there would never be another such group), who largely lived and acted independent of one another. This number was chosen to match the number of Nazgûl. Merry and Pippin were never intended to be a part of the Fellowship, with Elrond initially considering two Elf-lords from his own house. He wished to send the two younger hobbits back to the Shire as messengers to warn other Hobbits of the growing evil. However, the Halflings persevered: Merry was chosen while Gandalf convinced Elrond of the loyalty of Pippin.
The Fellowship of the Ring was formed by Elrond after the Council of Elrond. The Fellowship, being led mainly by Gandalf, headed down the path to Mordor.

After a long and difficult journey south from Rivendell, and a near-catastrophic attempt to cross over the Misty Mountains via the Pass of Caradhras, the Fellowship descended into Moria. In the former Dwarf-kingdom, they found evidence that Orcs had slain Gimli's kinsman Balin and other Dwarves who had returned there. They were soon confronted by the Balrog known as Durin's Bane, who had many Orc and Troll minions under his control. Gandalf fell facing this menace, and the company was forced to go on without him.
Once they escaped Moria, the Fellowship headed to the Elven forest of Lothlórien where they met with the Elven Lord Celeborn and Galadriel, Lady of Light. Galadriel supplied them each with special gifts from Lothlórien, boats and supplies so that they could travel down the river Anduin.
This route was quicker than an overland march, but the group was attacked by Orc archers and shadowed by Gollum, who had begun following them in Moria. Forced to portage their boats around the Rapids of Sarn Gebir and preparing to take the North Stair to avoid the Falls of Rauros, the Fellowship soon ran into difficulties. Boromir finally succumbed to temptation and attempted to seize the Ring from Frodo. This led to Frodo using the Ring to escape and he and Sam leaving to spare the others from its lure. The repentant Boromir died trying to defend Merry and Pippin against a large force of Uruk-hai from Isengard. The Fellowship was dissolved on the banks of the Anduin that day. Frodo and Sam carried on towards Mordor; Boromir was given funerary rites and sent floating over the falls, and Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli departed on their way to save Merry and Pippin.

After Boromir died the Fellowship split into three paths. From there, Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli chased after the Uruk-hai who took Merry and Pippin, believed to be the Ring-bearers, to Saruman in Isengard. Along the way, the trio crossed through Rohan and came across Éomer and his éored. After questioning Éomer, they found out that the riders had already slain the Uruk-hai the night before in a bloody massacre. Upon arriving at the site of the battle, Aragorn discovered that the hobbits fled deep into Fangorn Forest.
Gandalf, though to be dead when he fell at the Bridge of Khazad-dûm in Moria, came back to Middle-earth, reincarnated as Gandalf the White. He encountered Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli in Fangorn, and they, mistaking Gandalf for Saruman, attempted to kill him. Gandalf assured them that Merry and Pippin were safe (knowing they were in the hands of Treebeard). From there they rode out to Edoras, capital of Rohan, where they found King Théoden in ill condition, poisoned by Saruman's servant Gríma Wormtongue.
After leaving the Fellowship, Frodo and Sam continued their journey towards Mordor as they tried to navigate through the Emyn Muil, Gollum tailing them. While attempting to take One Ring in the hobbits' sleep, Frodo and Sam awoke and captured him. Frodo, realizing who he was, forced Gollum to swear servitude to the master of "the precious" and used him as a guide into Mordor.
Aragorn continued to refer to the company he led (Legolas and Gimli, occasionally joined by Gandalf, Merry, and Pippin) as the Fellowship of the Ring even after the original Fellowship broke up following Boromir's death. The Fellowship was reunited again long later, following the destruction of the One Ring in Battle of the Black Gate, parting finally on the hill of Dol Baran near Isengard. While other members of the Fellowship would meet again, this was the last time they were fully assembled without Boromir. Frodo and Gandalf would leave for the Undying Lands in TA 3021. Sam left for the Undying Lands in FO 61 (the end of the Third Age was TA 3022). Merry and Pippin left for Gondor and Rohan in FO 63, their death happened sometime at some point after. Gimli and Legolas left for the Undying Lands in FO 120 of the Fourth Age. Following the departures of Gimli and Legolas in FO 120, no member of the Fellowship is ever seen in the Middle-earth again.