Rivendell, or Imladris in Sindarin, was the name of an Elven settlement in Eastern Eriador and the valley containing it. Founded by Elrond Half-elven, it was first a stronghold and refuge in the Elves' first war with Sauron in the Second Age, but in the Third Age became a renowned, peaceful haven for wayward Elves, Rangers of the North, and other travelers. From that time, it was called by some the Last Homely House in the east of the civilized lands of Eriador, or the First Homely House west of the wild lands of Rhovanion over the Misty Mountains.

The peaceful, sheltered valley of Rivendell was located at the edge of a narrow gorge of the river Bruinen, well hidden amongst the moorlands and foothills of the Misty Mountains. One of the main approaches to Rivendell passed through the nearby Ford of Bruinen.

Rivendell was established amid the War of the Elves and Sauron by Elrond, son of Eärendil. In SA 1697, the realm of Eregion was laid waste by Sauron and Elrond was sent from Lindon with an Elven host to aid in the Elves of Eregion in resisting him. However, Elrond arrived too late and was forced, along with the refugees of Eregion, to retreat northward to Rivendell or Imladris, a valley in which they built a stronghold and refuge that assumed the same name. Sauron then found and besieged this valley, but withdrew upon the arrival of the Númenóreans.

After the forming of the Last Alliance of Elves and Men, the armies of Gil-galad and Elendil marched to Imladris and made camp in the valley to prepare for war, and then proceeded over the High Pass southeast to what would become Dagorlad.

Following the Disaster of the Gladden Fields, the last surviving son of Isildur, Valandil, was fostered in Elrond's home in Rivendell until he was ready to accede the throne eight years later.
When Angmar rose to power in the fourteenth century of the Third Age, Rivendell was again besieged, from TA 1356 to TA 1409. This siege was broken by reinforcements brought over the mountains from Lothlórien, and Angmar was repelled and subdued for a time.
However, in TA 1974, Arthedain fell to Angmar. Elrond then sent Glorfindel and a host of Elves to meet with the armies of Eärnil II and Círdan, defeating Angmar for good at the Battle of Fornost. After the fall of Angmar the heirs of Isildur were fostered in Rivendell.

During the Quest of Erebor, Bilbo Baggins and the Company of Thorin stopped at Rivendell. The cryptic instructions written in moon-letters on Thrór's map, telling how to enter the Lonely Mountain after Smaug seized it, were interpreted for the group by Elrond. After the quest, Bilbo and Gandalf returned there.

Years later, Frodo Baggins and his Hobbit companions journeyed to Rivendell, where they met with Bilbo, who had retired there after his eleventy-first birthday. Several other Elves, Dwarves, and Men also arrived in the valley on separate errands. The Fellowship of the Ring was formed, at the close of the decisive Council of Elrond.

Elrond departed the valley of Rivendell in TA 3021, marking the end of the Third Age. Afterward, Rivendell was for a time the dwelling place of his sons Elladan and Elrohir and also of Celeborn. The valley was abandoned at a later time.