Saruman, also known as Saruman the White, was the first of the Istari (Wizards), the emissaries of the Valar sent to Middle-earth in the Third Age to help the Free Peoples of the World to counter the possible return of Sauron. He was originally the chief and greatest of the Five Istari, as well as the head of the White Council that for a time opposed the re-emergence of the Dark Lord. For many years he was regarded as an ally of Gondor and Rohan, and was even granted guardianship of the tower of Orthanc as part of the defense of the West.
However, after studying the works of Sauron, particularly the lore of the Rings of Power, Saruman, overcome by pride and greed, betrayed his allies and swore fealty to Sauron, becoming one of his greatest servants. The Wizard, however, plotted to betray his "new master" as well and usurp his place as ruler of Middle-earth by claiming the One Ring for himself, or at least to become his right hand. In the War of the Ring, Saruman marshalled an army at Isengard to both conquer Rohan at Sauron's behest and try to claim the One Ring for himself.
After his master's downfall and his own failure to obtain the Ring or subjugate Rohan, Saruman journeyed to the Shire, where a host of Ruffians had already seized control of it through Lotho Sackville-Baggins, until Hobbits revolted and liberated the land, and exiled him. He was then slain by Gríma Wormtongue, his servant whom he had long abused. Following the death of Saruman's physical body, his spirit was rejected by the Valar due to his treachery.
Saruman was originally a powerful Maia of Aulë the Smith named Curumo (later in Sindarin, Curunír). From the beginning, he was much like Sauron, being ambitious and cunning, and desiring order. As Tarindor, Saruman was among the Five Guardians who were sent to reinforce Melian and the already active Guardians in protecting the newly-awakened Elves from Melkor's emissaries.

In Valinor, the land of the Valar, a council was called by Manwë, Eru's regent, shortly after Sauron's defeat by the Last Alliance of Elves and Men at the end of the Second Age. Though the Dark Lord was overthrown, he had not been effectively vanquished. 1000 years into the Third Age, his Shadow began to fall upon Middle-earth a second time. It was decided to send five emissaries to Middle-earth. These should be "mighty, peers of Sauron, yet forgo might, and clothe themselves in flesh," as they were intended to help Men and Elves unite against Sauron. The Wizards were forbidden, however, from matching the Dark Lord in power and fear, or trying to dominate the Free Peoples.
Curumo was one of those who volunteered, whereas the last one, Olórin, (later known as "Gandalf") was commanded by Manwë to go too. It was from this point that Curumo began to be jealous of Olórin, due to Varda's decision to send Olórin not as the third Istar, but as the second. He also was charged to take Aiwendil (later called "Radagast") to please Yavanna, which Curumo did not wish to do, and this led to contempt for the latter Wizard. The others who were chosen were Alatar and Pallando (the Blue Wizards). Curumo then was appointed overall leader of the group.

The Five Wizards arrived separately at the Grey Havens in the west of Eriador around the year TA 1000. Curumo appeared first, but apparently neglected to take Aiwendil with him; Aiwendil came later alongside Olórin. Only the keeper of the havens, Círdan the Shipwright, knew Curumo's nature and purpose. Curumo would later discover that Círdan had given Narya, the Red Ring, to Olórin upon their first landing in Middle-earth. Even though Curumo was recognized as the head of the order while Olórin was not, Círdan had divined Olórin as the wisest and greatest of the Istari. Curumo's jealousy of Olórin grew from these events, perhaps because he feared that he would eventually supplant him as chief of the Wizards.
To the Elves, Curumo became known as Curunír, whereas Men called him Saruman, the name by which he was afterwards remembered. The White Messenger and the two Blue Wizards went into the east of Middle-earth and their fate after this was unknown. After one and a half millennia, Saruman returned to the west, just as Sauron's power was growing again at Dol Guldur in Mirkwood.

Yet he is great among the Wise. He is the chief of my order and the head of the Council. His knowledge is deep, but his pride has grown with it, and he takes ill any meddling. The lore of the Elven-rings, great and small, is his province.
When the White Council was formed around the year 2463 of the Third Age to counter Sauron, Saruman was appointed its leader, though Galadriel wanted Gandalf in this position. Although Gandalf had declined leadership, Saruman continued to resent the Grey Pilgrim. He also had an intense dislike for Radagast, whom he dismissed as a fool.
At this point Saruman had begun to sense the resurgence of Sauron. This was also the same year that Sauron's One Ring was taken by the Stoor Sméagol (later called Gollum), who disappeared with it into the Misty Mountains for hundreds of years. The White Wizard then began to study the lore of the Rings of Power. However, his extensive research on the Rings eventually led him to admire the Dark Lord, which then caused him to fall into the folly of imitating him. Saruman believed he could be the ruler of Middle-earth, in Sauron's likeness, and "have his own will by force". Concluding that he should be the one to find the One Ring, Saruman, greedy for power became a traitor at heart, although the rest of the Council was unaware at the time.
It was during the meetings of the White Council that Saruman first noted Gandalf's interest in Hobbits and the Shire, and believing that all his deeds related to some as yet undisclosed plan of his for self-enhancement, the White Wizard himself began keeping a closer watch on the Grey Pilgrim and sent spies to the Shire to report on all his movements. At first, he himself visited it secretly but stopped when he realized that its inhabitants had noticed him. Amongst the purposes of his visits was to procure some of the halflings' Pipe-weed, since in secret imitation of Gandalf (and for which he publicly belittled him) Saruman had begun to smoke.

Soon after he took up his abode in Isengard. For this, Beren, Steward of Gondor, gave him leave, for Gondor still claimed Isengard as a fortress of its realm, and not part of Rohan. Beren also gave into Saruman's keeping the keys of Orthanc. That tower no enemy had been able to harm or to enter. In this way Saruman began to behave as a lord of Men; for at first he held Isengard as a lieutenant of the Steward and warden of the tower. But Fréaláf was as glad as Beren to have this so, and to know that Isengard was in the hands of a strong friend. A friend he long seemed, and maybe in the beginning he was one in truth.
In the year TA 2759, Saruman came to the crowning of Fréaláf Hildeson in Rohan, "bringing gifts" and wooing him with flattery. With the permission of both the Steward of Gondor, Beren, and the King of Rohan, Fréaláf, Saruman settled in Orthanc at Isengard as both "warden of the tower" and representative of Minas Tirith. Though recognized as an ally by both the Rohirrim and the Gondorians, the Wizard's main goal all along had been to eventually claim the stronghold as his own seat of power. As he had hoped, Saruman also found one of the remaining palantíri in Orthanc, but deceptively concealed his discovery from the rest of the White Council.
In TA 2850, Gandalf entered Dol Guldur and confirmed that the evil presence within was indeed Sauron. He then advised the White Council that they should attack Sauron. However, Saruman advised against this by deceitfully claiming that the One Ring would never be found. With almost the entire Council deceived, they did not attack. However, the Grey Pilgrim would later remark that it was at this meeting that he first began to suspect that the White Wizard desired to attain the One Ring. Saruman's real intention was to allow Sauron to build up his strength, so that the Ring would reveal itself and he could claim it first, so he was willing to let Sauron be for the time being.
Concealing his contempt, Saruman deceitfully persuaded Radagast to teach him how to tame birds and beasts; these he used as spies for his own purposes, unbeknownst to the Brown Wizard. He later found that the Enemy had more knowledge of the possible location of the One Ring than he expected. Therefore, in TA 2941, Saruman finally agreed to an assault upon Dol Guldur. The attack was successful, and by the devices of the White Wizard, the Dark Lord was driven from the fortress.
At the last meeting of the White Council in TA 2953, Saruman lied to the Council about the Ring being "passed down Anduin to the Sea". He then ceased all cooperation with the Wise, taking Isengard for his own and fortifying it. Surrounding himself with "all who hated Gondor and Rohan" (i.e. Northern Orcs from the Misty Mountains, Dunlendings and other evil things), Saruman troubled the borders of the Rohirrim during the reign of Thengel and began building his own army. Around TA 2990, Saruman started the "special breeding" of Orcs at Isengard and, as Morgoth and Sauron had done before him, crossbred Orcs with Men to make Half-orcs, and eventually his own Uruk-hai, both of which could endure the sunlight.

A new power is rising. Against it the old allies and policies will not avail us at all. There is no hope left in Elves or dying Númenor. This then is one choice before you, before us. We may join with that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf. There is hope that way. Its victory is at hand; and there will be rich reward for those that aided it.
Soon enough, Sauron, who had returned to Mordor, used the Ithil-stone to establish contact with Saruman's Orthanc-stone. Daunted with threats and lured with promises of power, Saruman submitted to Sauron. Fully betraying the White Council, the Wizard became one of the Dark Lord's chief agents, desiring or no longer opposing his victory. Though the Wise were suspicious of Saruman's designs concerning the Ring, they were unaware that he was now "an ally, or servant, of Sauron", and a traitor to them. But Saruman was, in truth, a faithless vassal, who coveted the Ring for himself. The fallen Wizard's endgame was to usurp his "new master" as Lord of the Rings over Middle-earth by claiming the One Ring for himself. If that gamble failed, Saruman reckoned that he would be the right-hand of Sauron, or rather the true power behind his throne. The Wizard failed to understand that he was little more than the Dark Lord's puppet and would have ultimately been cast aside; Sauron knew, or guessed, Saruman's thoughts "even without the aid of palantíri or of spies".
Working under orders from Mordor and also eager to expand his own dominion, the Wizard plotted to "deliver" Rohan to his "dark master". Aided by his Orcs, Saruman slowly turned Nan Curunír into "a child's model or a slave's flattery" of Mordor: trees were cut down and replaced by caverns filled with forges, furnaces and other machines. Around TA 3000, Saruman sent many of his Uruk-hai to join the Northern Orcs and the Mordor-orcs in raiding the eastern villages of Rohan. To further weaken the kingdom, Saruman bought Gríma Wormtongue, Théoden's counselor, with the promise of Éowyn's hand by TA 3014 and used him as a mole in the royal court to sap the king's strength with deceitful advice and poisons. Suspecting a potential connection between the Ring and the Shire (based mostly on Gandalf's interest there), Saruman instructed his agents to infiltrate the Shire and keep tabs on the comings and goings of any important Hobbits. His dealings with Pipe-weed had also earned him allies among the Sackville-Baggins and Bracegirdle families, who owned many plantations. Saruman also used his agents in Eriador to keep watch on the Dúnedain protecting the Shire, as well as to mislead Sauron's more trustworthy informants. Further trying to emulate his master, the Wizard crafted his own lesser ring and similarly styled himself as "Ring-maker".
Using the kind-hearted Radagast as an unwitting pawn, Saruman summoned Gandalf to Isengard; so it was that upon Gandalf's arrival, Saruman revealed his betrayal and true intentions, shedding the title of Saruman the White in favour of Saruman of Many Colours. He announced his desire to rule Middle-earth as Sauron's right-hand, or to supplant him using the Ring; he then demanded that the Grey Pilgrim submit to him or to his master. Saruman stated that siding with Sauron would be a wise decision. Gandalf refused both choices, for which Saruman imprisoned him atop Orthanc. This way, Saruman thought he would force Gandalf into revealing the Ring's whereabouts, before sending him as captive to Sauron in Mordor; Saruman had even revealed to Sauron he "had got as his prisoner Gandalf". But Gandalf later escaped with help from Gwaihir the Windlord, one of the Great Eagles, and made Saruman's treachery known to the rest of the Free Peoples at the Council of Elrond.

We will have peace, when you and all your works have perished--and the works of your dark master to whom you would deliver us. You are a liar, Saruman, and a corrupter of men's hearts. You hold out your hand to me, and I perceive only a finger of the claw of Mordor. Cruel and cold! Even if your war on me was just--as it was not, for were you ten times as wise you would have no right to rule me and mine for your own profit as you desired--even so, what will you say of your torches in Westfold and the children that lie dead there?
By one account, the Nazgûl came two days after Gandalf's escape, and Saruman used his voice to persuade the Morgul Lord that he did not know the Ring's location. The Wizard boasted that, had he known, he would have already claimed the Ring and the Nine would have submitted to him. Saruman then told them that Gandalf knew, and that they should seek him nearby. Hearing this, the Nazgûl went back on the main road and instead found Gríma, on his way to tell Saruman that Gandalf had been to Edoras. Fearing for his life, Wormtongue revealed that the corrupted Wizard had withheld information and told the Ringwraiths how to reach the Shire.
By another account, Saruman still had Gandalf as a prisoner when the Nazgûl arrived. The Wizard assured the Ringwraiths that he would obtain the Shire's whereabouts from the Grey Pilgrim or hand him over to them. Daunted by the "full horror of service to Mordor", Saruman had actually been about to beg Gandalf for forgiveness and help, only to find him gone. Nonetheless, he pretended that the Grey Pilgrim was still there and had just given up the location of the Shire. Saruman believed he now had enough time to try seize the Ring, while still feigning allegiance to Sauron. But the Ringwraiths soon learned that the Wizard knew far more than he had shared with them. On their way to the Shire, the Nazgûl encountered one of Saruman's agents in Eriador, from whom they got detailed maps of the Shire. They sent the spy to Bree after warning him that he was now in the service of Mordor not Isengard; the spy in question was the ill-favored Dunlending at the The Prancing Pony.
Commanded by Sauron, Saruman moved against Théoden to keep Rohan from riding to Gondor's aid. With Gríma preventing any military mobilization within the kingdom, Saruman sent large raiding forces to wreak havoc in the Westfold of Rohan. The only true obstacles to his invasion were Théoden's son and nephew, Théodred and Éomer respectively. As Wormtongue had failed to turn the two men against each other, the White Wizard tasked his servants to slay the king's heir at all costs. Per this special order, the warriors of Isengard engaged the defenders of Rohan at the Fords of Isen; the First Battle at the Fords of Isen ended in the death of Théodred followed by the retreat of Saruman's hordes. At the same time, the Wizard also betrayed his master: he sent trusted warbands to hunt down the Fellowship and capture the Ring-bearer. Saruman's scouts, led by Uglúk, ambushed the company at Amon Hen, where they took Pippin and Merry captive, while also shooting Boromir "with many black-feathered arrows" when he tried to defend the Hobbits. Slowed on their way back to Isengard by conflict with Mordor-orcs loyal to Sauron, the Isengarders were slain on the eaves of Fangorn by Rohirrim led by Éomer. Gimli believed he had glimpsed Saruman at the site of the skirmish, presumably having hastened to claim the Ring from the Hobbits.
The Wizard's position was becoming dangerously isolated: he lacked the Ring, his neighbors he had "made [his] enemies" and he had also "cheated [his] new master". Believing he might yet claim lordship over Rohan and regain Sauron's favor by delivering the Rohirrim to him, Saruman intensified his efforts against Théoden. Although Gríma Wormtongue had been ousted as an agent of the Enemy, Rohan had been weakened, allowing Saruman to marshal his full might and unleash his Uruk-hai hordes upon the Rohirrim people at Helm's Deep. Though it initially held the upper hand, Saruman's army was vanquished in the Battle of the Hornburg, its ranks broken by Gandalf's reinforcements. Meanwhile, the Wizard also found his own stronghold under assault. The Ents led by Treebeard besieged Isengard, seeking vengeance for incursions by Orc axemen into Fangorn. These two confrontations led to the end of Saruman's reign of terror in the West, while also costing Sauron a valuable, albeit duplicitous, vassal.

Your servants are destroyed and scattered; your neighbours you have made your enemies; and you have cheated your new master, or tried to do so. When his eye turns hither, it will be the red eye of wrath. But when I say 'free', I mean 'free': free from bond, of chain or command: to go where you will, even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if you desire. But you will first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your staff. They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later, if you merit them.
Following the Ents' destruction of Isengard, Saruman found himself confined to Orthanc and his servants scattered or killed. After the arrival of Théoden, Gandalf, Aragorn, and the remaining members of the Fellowship, Saruman confronted them from the balcony of Orthanc. He made one final unsuccessful attempt to bring Théoden under his sway, offering him counsel and friendship. The king refused, recognizing him as a pawn of Sauron and demanding justice for the atrocities Saruman had committed against the Rohirrim. Gandalf offered Saruman a chance at redemption, which involved surrendering his staff and the Key of Orthanc as a pledge, in exchange for freedom to head wherever he pleased - even to Mordor. Saruman had a moment of doubt but in the end pride, envy, fear and hate won over and he refused the chance of redemption. Moreover, he did not want to "appear a rebel" to his master and suffer his wrath.
Gandalf, who had returned from death to accomplish the mission Saruman did not, expelled the turncoat from the ranks of the Istari and the White Council and broke his staff. Saruman also lost the palantír of Orthanc when Gríma threw it off a balcony, undecided about which he hated more, Saruman or Gandalf, and hitting neither. With no captive to send nor palantír to "answer the summons", Saruman had no means of appeasing Sauron. He thus locked himself in Orthanc, living in terror of both the Free Peoples and his master.

Left out of the final stages of the War of the Ring, Saruman eventually managed to persuade the Ents holding him captive to let him and his servant Gríma leave Isengard after he handed to them the Key of Orthanc. He went thence to the Shire, which his ally Lotho Sackville-Baggins had brought under control. Powerless to directly avenge himself on Gandalf, Saruman instead resolved to hurt the Hobbits of whom Gandalf was so fond. To this end, he spent his final days as a criminal master in Hobbiton known as Sharkey (from the Orkish sharkû, meaning "old man"), disposing of Lotho Sackville-Baggins through Gríma. But his reign of terror came to an end with his overthrow in the Battle of Bywater, after which Frodo confronted Saruman and exiled him from the Shire. Saruman agreed to leave. However, when Frodo attempts to convince Gríma that he no longer needs to serve Saruman, Saruman exposes Grima's murder of Lotho Sackville-Baggins. Gríma argued that Saruman made him do that, but Saruman mocked him and slapped him down. As Saruman began to walk, a now enraged Gríma, who finally had had enough of Saruman's physical and verbal abuse, slit his throat from behind with a dagger, leading to the end of the traitorous and corrupted Wizard.
After Saruman departed from Orthanc, King Elessar entered the tower with the intent of re-ordering it. Inside, Elessar's men found many treasures that Saruman had stolen from Rohan. The original Elendilmir, presumed lost forever when Isildur perished in the Gladden Fields, was also found, as well as a golden chain presumed to have once borne the One Ring. It was suspected that, during his search for the Ring near the Anduin, Saruman had discovered the remains of Isildur and burnt them out of scorn, keeping only his possessions.