Théoden, son of Thengel and Morwen Steelsheen, was the seventeenth King of Rohan, last of the Second Line of the royal House of Eorl.Théoden, son of Thengel and Morwen Steelsheen, was the seventeenth King of Rohan, last of the Second Line of the royal House of Eorl.
Théoden was the only son of Thengel, and became king after the death of his father in TA 2980. Théoden spoke Sindarin and Westron more often than Rohanese, due to the influence of his father, and spent a part of his youth growing up in the mountain vales of Gondor, his mother's homeland.
His sister Théodwyn lived with him in Edoras, and after she and her husband both died he adopted her children Éomer and Éowyn as his own. He had a son Théodred, whose mother, Elfhild, died at childbirth.

By the time of the War of the Ring, Théoden had been king for nearly 40 years, and was becoming old and tired. He was increasingly misled by his chief adviser Gríma (or Wormtongue as most others in the Mark called him), who was secretly in the employ of Saruman the White. Gríma may even have been poisoning Théoden. In the last years before the War of the Ring, Théoden let his rule slip out of his hands, and Gríma gained an increasingly large hold over him. Rohan had been troubled by Orcs and Dunlendings since the time of his father and now by the new fighting Uruk-hai, who operated under the will of Saruman, ruling from Isengard.
When Théoden's son Théodred was mortally wounded at the First Battle of the Fords of Isen with the Orcs of Saruman, his nephew Éomer became his heir. Éomer however fell out of favor with Wormtongue and was placed under arrest.
When Gandalf the White, Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli appeared before him, Théoden initially rebuked Gandalf's advice to resist Saruman, but after being released from the effects of Gríma, he commanded Háma to release his nephew and bring him his sword. Théoden, under advice from Gandalf, advanced to face the invasion by the forces of Saruman. However on meeting Ceorl on the road and realising the strength of Isengard he rode instead to the fortress of the Hornburg, and shortly thereafter successfully defended the keep at the Battle of the Hornburg despite overwhelming odds. After this, he became known as Théoden Ednew, the Renewed, because he had thrown off the yoke of Saruman.
Following the battle, Théoden came with Gandalf to the ruins of Isengard, where he met Meriadoc Brandybuck and Peregrin Took. He soon had favor for Merry, and expressed great interest in hearing more about the Shire, especially Hobbit lore surrounding pipe-weed. Riding to Dunharrow by mountain paths, Théoden arrived to find the muster of the Rohirrim in full swing. That night, errand riders from Gondor arrived and presented him with the Red Arrow, a symbol of dire need and summons to fulfill the Oath of Eorl.
Théoden then led six thousand Rohirrim to the aid of Gondor at the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, bravely charging the legions of Sauron, where he won great glory by defeating a chieftain of the Southrons along with the bearer of a banner depicting a "black serpent upon scarlet".
He challenged the Witch-king of the nine Ringwraiths, and was mortally wounded when his horse Snowmane fell upon him after being spooked by the Witch-king's winged steed. He was quickly protected by Éowyn and Merry, both of whom had ridden to war in secret.
Théoden's wounds were mortal and he perished on the Pelennor Fields. His body was preserved in the Hallows of Minas Tirith until Éomer returned with a cortege. Théoden was then buried in the Barrowfield outside Edoras, the last king of the second line.
After his death, the Rohirrim minstrel Gléowine composed a song for him and the other Kings of Rohan.