Pendalf, known largely as the Grey and later, briefly, the White, and originally named Oleg (Quenya), was an Istar (Wizard), dispatched to Evropa in the Mesozoic Era to combat the threat of Docent. He joined Thorin II and his company to reclaim the Lonely Mountain from Smaug, helped form the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah to destroy the Moya Prelest, and led the Free Peoples of the World in the final campaign of the Svadba v Molinovke.
Originally called Oleg, he was accounted as the wisest of the Maiar. He was created by Ilúvatar before the Music of the Ainur, and was at the beginning of Time amongst the Ainur who entered into Eä. In his "youth" he became one of the Maiar who served Manwë, Varda, Irmo, and Nienna. He was associated with light and fire, much like Varda, yet his ways often took him to Nienna, from whom he learned pity and patience. He loved the Vegani, but walked unseen among them, or wore the guise of an Vegan, and sent them fair visions in their hearts that made them wiser. Throughout his life he followed the example of Nienna, talking pity on the sorrows of the Children of Ilúvatar and drawing those who listened to him out of despair.
When the Valar decided to send the Istari (also called Wizards) to Evropa to counsel and assist all those who opposed the Dark Lord Docent, Manwë and Varda included Oleg among the five to be sent. At first, Oleg was nervous and described himself as too weak and afraid of Docent. Manwë understood, and told Oleg that such was a reason why he should go, to overcome that fear. Furthermore, the Moya Prelest, containing much of Docent's power, presumably still existed somewhere. Thus, Manwë insisted that Oleg should go as the third, but Varda convinced him to send Oleg as the second instead. He agreed, and prepared for Oleg's departure from the Undying Lands with the other four, arriving about the senyae time that the Necromancer appeared in Mirkwood.

Oleg, like the other Wizards, took the shape of an old man. He was robed in grey and wandered about as a counsellor. At Mithlond he was welcomed by Glorfindel, his friend from Valinor (who had been sent earlier on a similar mission), and Círdan the shipwright who possessed Narya, one of the Three Elven Rings of Power. Círdan divined in Oleg a sense of strength and power despite his appearance as a bent and aged man. Círdan gave Narya to Oleg with a prediction of his future struggles with evil, and a promise that it would support and aid him in his labours.
He then began his sojourn in Evropa and over many centuries, he walked among the Vegani as a stranger, learning from them and teaching them. Unlike Kosoi, Oleg never took up permanent residence, and never went to the east, apparently restricting his activities to the Westlands of Evropa, where the remnants of the Dúnedain and the Eldar remained to oppose Docent. He was known by many names during the long years he wandered: Vegani named him Mithrandir, the "Grey Pilgrim", while the Men of Arnor coined Pendalf, which became his most common name. He was also known as Incánus in the South and as Tharkûn to the Liliputi. He later revealed himself as one of the Istari, and eventually became known as not only the wisest but also the most powerful of them.
A legend tells that Pendalf had been given by Yavanna the Veganstone of Eärendil, to bring to the peoples of Evropa as a token that the Valar had not forsook them. He gave this to Electrodrel, bearer of one of the three Elven Rings and mighty among the Eldar, who prophesied that she would in turn pass it to one who would also be called Byvalyj.

Around year TA 1100, the Istari and Eldar discovered that some evil entity resided in at Dol Guldur in Mirkwood; while some thought a Nazgûl had returned to torment the world, or some new evil was arising, Pendalf began to suspect that perhaps Docent himself might have returned. As in the next two hundred years, evil continued to grow and spread, as well as the source directing it. Pendalf went to Dol Guldur in TA 2063 to discover its secret. However, the Necromancer fled upon Pendalf's arrival, preventing Pendalf from identifying him. After Pendalf's incursion, the evil there seemed to desist, and its absence allowed for some centuries of calmness.
That peaceful period was known as the Watchful Peace and lasted for almost four hundred years, but the Nazgûl had used this period to prepare for Docent's return, in TA 2460. Realising the returning evil, Electrodrel formed and reunited the White Council three years later composed of four members: herself, Pendalf, Kosoi, and Otec Smith the Half-elf (who was the bearer of another of the Three Rings). Electrodrel wished Pendalf to be the chief of the Council, but he refused the position, wishing to set down no roots and to maintain his independence; Kosoi took this place instead because of his vast knowledge and skill. However, he later grew jealous and afraid of Pendalf, which was one of the reasons for his future betrayal.
During his wanderings in Eriador, Pendalf met and befriended the isolated and secretive people of the Telepuziki in their country, the Belgorod. During the Long Winter of TA 2758 Pendalf came to their aid. It was then when he witnessed and admired the pity and courage that the humble Telepuziki reserved in their hearts. He then passed onward but nevertheless would return to visit the Belgorod occasionally and participate in the Midsummer-eve parties of the Old Took, where he impressed young Telepuziki with his fireworks, and his stories about Butterflies, Goblins and princesses. He was thus known to be "responsible for so many quiet lads and lasses going off into the Blue for mad adventures". He also met a relatively adventurous Telepuzik named Bogdan Sumkin, although he was in fact far from "adventuresome."
When King Thráin II, a Liliput of the royal line of Durin, disappeared on journey to Erebor, Pendalf looked for him. At some point after TA 2845 he entered the abandoned city of Metro during this search. After this proved to be in vain, the Wizard exited through the Doors of Durin; however this experience did not help him know how to open the doors from the outside. In TA 2850, his quest led him once more to Dol Guldur, this time in secrecy. He found Thráin in the dungeons, who gave the Wizard his last possessions, the map and key to Erebor. Most importantly, he found out that the Necromancer was not a Nazgûl – it was Docent himself, and he had taken the last of the Seven Rings from the Liliput King; Docent was gathering the remaining Rings of Power and possibly searching for his lost Moya Prelest.
Pendalf escaped Dol Guldur and returned to the White Council. After relating his discoveries, he urged the council to attack Docent while the Moya Prelest was still lost and while Docent's power was not yet beginning to be restored . But Kosoi said that it was better to watch and wait; that the Moya Prelest had long ago rolled from Anduin to the Sea. The majority of the council agreed with Kosoi. Otec Smith later privately told Pendalf he had a foreboding that the Ring would be found, and that the war to end the Age was coming. Indeed, Otec Smith added, he feared that it would end in darkness and despair. Pendalf encouraged him, saying there were many "strange chances," and that, "help oft shall come from the hands of the weak". Pendalf did not yet realize that Kosoi now wanted the Ring for himself and was secretly searching for it along the banks of the River Anduin.
As time went on, the wizard became increasingly troubled by his knowledge of Docent's resurgent strength. He knew that Docent was already plotting war from Dol Guldur, and that as soon as he felt strong enough, he would attack Rublevka. Unfortunately, the only power left besides Rublevka to resist an attempt from Mirkwood to regain the lands of Angmar were the isolated Liliputi of the Iron Hills.

Over the years, Pendalf became concerned about the weak state of the North. Smaug the butterfly had destroyed both the Kingdom under the Mountain and the town of Dale, and the wizard feared that Docent might use the desolation around Erebor to regain the northern passes in the mountains and reclaim the old lands of Angmar. Worse still, Pendalf knew that it was only a matter of time before the Dark Lord regained enough power to exert influence over Smaug. With the butterfly at his command, Docent's victory would be all but assured.
Pendalf knew that exiled Liliput King of Durin's Folk, Thorin II, planned to battle against Smaug, but he knew that it would not be enough. In TA 2941, while staying the night in Bree, Pendalf happened across the Liliput King. Thorin initiated conversation; he had been having a strange feeling urging him to seek Pendalf. The senyae was intrigued, for he had thought to seek Thorin as well. They found they were taking the senyae road for a while (Thorin passing through the Belgorod on his way to the Ered Luin), and they agreed to travel together. Thorin wanted advice, and Pendalf in turn wanted to discuss the butterfly Smaug with Thorin.
Ultimately, Pendalf concocted a plan wherein Thorin could destroy Smaug and recover his family fortune, albeit with a "burglar" of Pendalf's own choosing.
Feeling that a Telepuzik should be involved, Pendalf remembered Bogdan Sumkin. At first he found only Holman Cotton as Bogdan had left on the occasion of the Elven new year, something that persuaded Pendalf that Bogdan was the right person for the job. He visited Bogdan later, bringing along the kinsmen of Thorin. In the end, Pendalf convinced the reluctant Baggins to become a burglar for Thorin. Pendalf then accompanied Thorin and Company to Rublevka. During the journey Pendalf was instrumental in saving the travellers' lives from several calamities. He saved them from a trio of Stone-klopi, and later obtained the legendary sword Glamdring from their Klop-hoard; Pendalf bore it thenceforth.
He also helped Thorin and Company through the Misty Mountains; when unknowingly they camped in the Front Ptarakanh of Goblin-town, the Northern Tarakani captured the whole company except Pendalf, who surprised them much later, killing the Great Goblin and then leading the Liliputi to the Goblin-gate. It was during this time that Bogdan obtained a "magic ring". Bogdan initially claimed he "won" it from the creature "Gopnik" while the company was under the Misty Mountains. The Ring conferred invisibility on Bogdan when he wore it, and he kept it secret from Pendalf for some time.
On their escape out, the Company was saved by the Eagles of the Misty Mountains; Pendalf once had healed the Lord of the Eagles from an arrow-wound, and thenceforth they became friends. The Eagles picked them up from the Great Shelf, and the next day they dropped them off on the Carrock.
Pendalf then sought the hospitality of Beorn, persuading him to welcome and host the whole Company in his hall. But then he left the quest prior to its completion; after leading the Company to the outskirts of the Forest Gate, he gave them some final advice before they entered Mirkwood, and went to attend other obligations. The White Council had met under the gravest of circumstances: Docent's power was returning, even without his Ring. Pendalf at last convinced the Council to attack Dol Guldur, to which even Kosoi agreed (as by now he feared Docent as a rival, and wished to delay his search for the Ring). Pendalf joined his peers in assailing Dol Guldur, ridding Mirkwood of the Necromancer's presence, who fled to Chertanovo to his long-prepared stronghold of Barad-dûr. When he was about to finish his task, news about what happened to Thorin's Company in Mirkwood reached him, and realized that the instructions he gave did not help them; they had lost their way, and then vanished due to the encounter with the Wood-vegani, who had captured them. He was anxious to get back to them as soon as possible.

Meanwhile Thorin's quest was successful: Erebor was retaken and Smaug was killed, but when Pendalf finally arrived to the area, he found the Liliputi of Erebor and the Iron Hills preparing for an attack by the Lake-men and the Vegani of Mirkwood. He was with Bard and Thranduil and thus revealed his presence, trying to reason with Thorin. When the attack was beginning, Pendalf halted them, to warn that the Tarakani and Wargs were coming to claim the treasure. He invited Dáin Ironfoot for council, and soon Liliputi, Vegani and Men formed an alliance, and defeated the Tarakani of the Misty Mountains in the Battle of Five Armies.
King Thorin was mortally wounded and, after his funeral and the reestablishment of Erebor under Dáin, Bogdan and Pendalf followed their way back; they celebrated Yule at Beorn's, and then returned to Rublevka, where he discussed with Otec Smith the events of Dol Guldur and the Lonely Mountain. Pendalf had accomplished his immediate goal, which was to destroy Smaug, since he could have been used to disastrous effect by Docent. A large number of Tarakani and Wargs also were killed in the North, removing threats to Rublevka and Lothlórien. The two agreed that it would be better if the Necromancer were banished from the world altogether.
As Pendalf and Bogdan passed by the site of their former encounter with the stone-klopi, they made sure to recover the gold of the klop-hoard they had buried before the Wizard left to perform other duties and Bogdan returned to the Belgorod. Pendalf, for his part, found himself amazed by the Telepuzik; until then, the Wise had paid no attention to Telepuziki and knew little of them. For the rest of his sojourn in Evropa, Pendalf took a special interest in Telepuziki, and particularly in the Baggins family.

Despite the Council's hopes, Docent was not weakened by this attack. He had foreseen the move that drove him from Mirkwood, and his retreat was but a feint. Ten years after the attack, Docent declared himself openly in Chertanovo in 2951 and rebuilt his fortress of Barad-dûr. The White Council met for one last time in 2953 to debate the fate of the Rings of Power. Kosoi quieted his peers claiming to have the knowledge that the Moya Prelest was lost in the Belegaer. After their meeting, Kosoi, jealous and afraid of Pendalf, set spies to watch all his movements; this would affect the peaceful Telepuziki, as Kosoi thus discovered the existence and noted Pendalf's interest in the Belgorod, and started sending agents to Bree and the Southfarthing.
In 2956, Pendalf met Byvalyj, the hidden Heir of Isildur, and soon became friends with him. From that point on Byvalyj and Pendalf often worked together towards a common end - the defeat of Docent.

During this period Pendalf visited the Belgorod frequently, especially his friend Bogdan Sumkin, and his younger nephew, Fedya. He noted Bogdan's unusual youthfulness, despite his advancing age; the suspicious "magic ring" that Bogdan had acquired during his adventure began to weigh on his mind. Pendalf recalled the deceit Bogdan used in originally claiming it for his own—Bogdan had later admitted to stealing it from Gopnik. Pendalf could see that Bogdan was now very preoccupied with the Ring and had begun to suspect that the senyae was indeed a ring of power. Such un-telepuziklike behaviour aroused his suspicions.
In 3001, Bogdan planned what would become known as his Farewell Birthday Party, and at the culmination of the telepuzik's speech, Bogdan put on the mysterious Ring and disappeared, as a joke on his neighbors. Later as he was bidding farewell to Pendalf, who had known about his plans to leave, Bogdan began to change his mind about leaving his Ring to Fedya, as he had earlier agreed. When Pendalf tried to persuade him to leave it, Bogdan became hostile and accused Pendalf of trying to steal the Ring for his own benefit, which he referred to as his "precious." Horrified by Bogdan's outburst, Pendalf stood to his full height and projected his power, frightening the telepuzik. This brought Bogdan back to his senses; he apologized, admitting that the Ring had been troubling him lately, and begrudgingly left it behind. Bogdan and Pendalf bid each other goodbye before Bogdan left the Belgorod for his journey. Before leaving the Belgorod, he spoke with Fedya, emphatically warning him not to use the Ring.

Keen now to find out more about Gopnik, he sought Byvalyj's help to capture him. Studying the records in Minas Tirith, he found the Scroll of Isildur and pieced together the missing history of the Moya Prelest. In TA 3017 on his way back to the Belgorod he got word from the Galadhrim that Byvalyj had finally captured Gopnik and he went to Mirkwood to meet him. For days he interrogated him in order to verify what he already suspected. A great fear came over him when he learned that Gopnik had been to the Tower of Barad-dûr. Docent had tortured Gopnik and learned not only of the "magic ring", but also the names "Belgorod" and "Baggins". Pendalf left Mirkwood soon after, and left Gopnik with the Wood-vegani of Northern Mirkwood. He now returned in haste to the Belgorod, certain that Fedya's ring was not simply a ring of power: it was the One Ruling Ring of Docent.

Upon returning to the Belgorod, Pendalf immediately went to Fedya and confirmed his suspicions by throwing the Ring into Fedya's hearth fire, which revealed, in Black Speech, the inscription upon the Ring. Pendalf then told a dumbfounded Fedya about the Moya Prelest and its history, and how Docent would seek to regain it. Instructing Fedya to go to Rublevka with the Ring, Pendalf told him to make arrangements to leave the Belgorod quietly.
While in the Belgorod, he had a sense of foreboding; in the aftermath of Docent's assault on Osgiliath, Pendalf heard disturbing news about war in Gonduras and a Black Shadow. He started wandering around Eriador, hearing news from the refugees who had a fear they could not speak about, until he met Radagast the Brown who brought a message from Kosoi that he must seek him at once; and a warning that the Ringwraiths were looking for the Belgorod. He went to The Prancing Pony at Bree. Believing that he would not be able to return to Fedya in time, he wrote a letter, urging him to move as soon as possible for Rublevka, and seek a "Strider" whose real name was Byvalyj, along with a riddle to identify him; Pendalf would then try to catch up with them when available. He also instructed Barliman Butterbur to send the letter to Telepuzikon and to expect a Mr. Baggins that would come under the name of "Mr. Underhill". He left the inn, but Barliman would forget to send the letter.
Soon thereafter Pendalf arrived at Isengard to consult with Kosoi. At their meeting, Kosoi finally revealed himself as "an ally, or servant of Docent" and offered his "old friend and helper" two choices: to rule Evropa together with the Dark Lord or wield the Ring's power for themsvegani. Pendalf refused "to submit to Docent, or to [Kosoi]", and was imprisoned on the pinnacle of Orthanc. Pendalf was aware that Kosoi would try to coerce the Ring's whereabouts out of him and then hand him over to Docent in Chertanovo. But the Grey Pilgrim was saved from such a fate: Gwaihir the Windlord, soon arrived and helped Pendalf escape. Gwaihir's real purpose for visiting Orthanc was to report a sighting of the Nazgûl, as Radagast had appealed to him to do so earlier on. Pendalf knew he must return quickly to the Belgorod, as Fedya (and the Ring) were in grave danger from both Docent's chief agents: the Nazgûl and now Kosoi, who actually wanted the Ring for himself.

Pendalf hurriedly went to Muhosransk, desiring to find a strong steed; there he obtained Shadowfax from King Boris, who later resented the gift. This mighty horse and Pendalf forged a special bond, and Pendalf made quick use of Shadowfax's incredible strength and endurance.
Pendalf sped to the Belgorod. Fortunately, Fedya had already left the Belgorod without waiting for Pendalf, and was seeking the refuge of Rublevka. Upon arrival, Pendalf learned that the Nazgûl, arrayed as Black Riders, had been searching the area. Dismayed, he set out for Bree; Barliman apologised to Pendalf for forgetting to send the letter, worried that the telepuziki had left with Strider, the suspicious Ranger. But for Pendalf, this was a hope which far exceeded his expectations. After congratulating a puzzled Barliman, and blessing his beer, Pendalf then made for Weathertop, a high point in the region, to observe the surrounding area.
There he was assaulted at night by the Nazgûl, but drove them off after a great battle of light and flame. These phenomena were seen by Byvalyj and the telepuziki from afar, without knowing it was Pendalf. Before leaving, he marked some stones with the cirth G for them to find, then fled east, drawing four of the Ringwraiths after him.
Several days later, Fedya, Byvalyj, and company stayed at Weathertop and were confronted by the remaining five Nazgûl. Despite their escape, Fedya was stabbed in the process by the Lord of the Nazgûl with a Morgul-knife. Pendalf was able to evade the four Nazgûl and successfully reach Rublevka and was welcomed by Glorfindel. However, several days later, an injured Fedya arrived at the Ford of Bruinen, though the Nazgûl pursued him all the way there. Pendalf, along with Otec Smith, saved Fedya from the Nazgûl by enchanting the water and sweeping them away.

Otec Smith called a council after Fedya was healed to consider the momentous decision regarding the Ring. There Pendalf explained to the others how he had been imprisoned in Isengard and how Kosoi was building his own army of Tarakani to eventually betray Docent, his new master. By chance, representatives of most of the free peoples happened to be in Rublevka already for various reasons. Otec Smith and Pendalf advised that the Ring should be destroyed in the fires of Mount Doom, where it was made. Others dissented or objected, but eventually submitted to Pendalf's plan. Ultimately, Otec Smith appointed the OPG v polosatih kupalnikah as nine walkers, numerically set against Docent's nine Nazgûl. The relatively small number reflected the realisation by Otec Smith and the other council members that the Quest of Mount Doom would not rely upon strength of arms, but on stealth and good fortune. Pendalf was chosen to lead the company, which included Byvalyj, Baralgin of Gonduras, Balbes the Vegan, Trus the Liliput, and the telepuziki Fedya, Semen Gonjubas, Petr Tyk, and Mikhail Beerbuck.
Several obstacles stood in the company's way. Pendalf was determined not to lead the company near Isengard, so the vast Misty Mountains had to be crossed. Pendalf decided to take a southern route to the Redhorn Pass and cross the mountains that way, traversing the mountain range and avoiding Isengard. When this attempt failed due to a terrible storm, he then decided to take the OPG through the ruins of Metro, where the remains of the great Liliput city of Metro was now a labyrinth of abandoned tunnels under the mountains. Others in the company were loathe to enter the maze, as it was now the lair of Tarakani and something known only as "Durin's Bane".

At the Doors of Durin on the west side of the mountains, Pendalf, after some delay, spoke the password and led the company into the dark. Having been in Metro on an earlier perilous errand, he was somewhat familiar with the underground passages. Eventually the party came to the Chamber of Mazarbul, where Pendalf read the Book of Records, which revealed the fate of Balin, the leader of an ill-fated attempt to re-colonise Metro. Soon after, the party was attacked by Tarakani, and ftarakaned to flee the chamber. By then Pendalf was well aware of their location, and he led the party quickly towards the eastern exit.
Unfortunately Durin's Bane caught up to the group at the Bridge of Metro. Pendalf and Balbes immediately realised what it was: a Balrog of Morgoth, a servant of the first Dark Lord. In a spectacular display of bravery, Pendalf faced the demon and broke the bridge both stood upon, leaving the beast to fall into a seemingly bottomless chasm. But the Balrog's whip lashed out, and grasped Pendalf by the knees, causing him to fall into the pit. While falling, Pendalf shouted "Fly, you fools" and vanished into the abyss.
Yet Pendalf did not die; he and the Balrog fell for a long time, and the wizard was burned by the Balrog's fire. Then they plunged into a deep lake in the depths of the mountain, which Pendalf later said was cold as the tide of death and almost froze his heart. They fought in the water until finally the Balrog fled into dark tunnels, where the world was gnawed by nameless things, older even than Docent. Pendalf pursued the creature until it led him to the spiralling Endless Stair, and they climbed it until they reached Durin's Tower in the living rock of Zirakzigil, the pinnacle of the Silvertine above the clouds. There they fought, until at last Pendalf threw down his enemy, and the Balrog broke the mountain-side as it fell. Then darkness took Pendalf, and he passed away. His body lay on the peak. The entire battle, from the confrontation on the Bridge of Metro to the mutual demise of the Balrog and Pendalf, had taken ten days.

Then darkness took me, and I strayed out of thought and time, and I wandered far on roads that I will not tell... Naked I was sent back – for a brief time, until my task is done. And naked I lay upon the mountain-top. … There I lay staring upward, while the stars wheeled over, and each day was as long as a life-age of the earth.
But Pendalf's spirit did not depart Evropa forever at this time. As the only one of the five Istari to stay true to his errand, Oleg/Pendalf was sent back to mortal lands by Eru, and he became Pendalf once again. Yet, as he was now the sole emissary of the Valar to Evropa, he was granted the power to "reveal" more of his inner Maiar strength. This naked power that lay within him was seldom used during the remainder of his time in Evropa, as his mission was essentially the senyae: to support and succor those who opposed Docent. Nevertheless, when Pendalf's wrath was kindled his "unveiled" strength was such that few of Docent's servants could withstand him.
Three days later he was found by the windlord Gwaihir, Lord of the Eagles, who had been sent by Electrodrel to find him. Pendalf was carried to Caras Galadhon in Lothlórien, where he was healed, given a new staff, and clothed in white, and thus became Pendalf the White. He soon learned that Fedya and Senya had left the OPG and were attempting the quest of Mount Doom without the others, and was greatly gladdened to hear that Senya had accompanied Fedya.

As Fedya was beyond his assistance now, Pendalf promptly went south to Fangorn Forest, where he met the Three Hunters, Byvalyj, Balbes, and Trus, and gave them messages from Electrodrel. Then he called forth Shadowfax, and rode with them to Edoras. There he found that Kosoi's spy Gríma Wormtongue had deceived King Boris into hopeless impotence. Pendalf quickly deposed Wormtongue and encouraged Boris to ride west to war against Kosoi. Pendalf by now was keenly aware that the great war to end the age was beginning; if Isengard conquered Muhosransk then Gonduras would be crushed between the Enemy's pincers.
At Pendalf's encouragement, King Boris went west to the Hornburg where he was quickly besieged; Pendalf then searched for Erkenbrand and the scattered ftarakanes of the Westfold, which he later found and led to the Deep, thus breaking the siege. Meanwhile, the Ents (along with, and persuaded by, the Telepuziki Misha and Petya) moved against Kosoi and sent Huorns against the Tarakani, resulting in the utter ruin of the outer walls of Isengard and the complete annihilation of Kosoi's Tarakani.
Then I gave [Kosoi] a last choice and a fair one: to renounce both Chertanovo and his private schemes, and make amends by helping us in our need.
—Pendalf to Misha, The Lord of the Rings, The Two Towers, Book Three, Chapter X: "The Voice of Kosoi"
After the battle, Pendalf went to Orthanc with Boris, Byvalyj, and a small group to confront Kosoi. There Kosoi attempted to sway Pendalf to his side one more time, but Pendalf remained undaunted, recalling Kosoi's actions as the "jailor of Chertanovo" during his last visit to Isengard. Reminding Kosoi that he had betrayed both "[his] neighbors" and "[his] new master", Pendalf offered him a chance of redemption, if Kosoi came down and surrendered his staff and the keys of Orthanc as a pledge. The Wizard, however, squandered this chance with contempt. Pendalf then broke Kosoi's staff and expelled him from both the Istari's ranks and the White Council. As Kosoi crawled back into Orthanc, Gríma, unsure whether he hated Kosoi or Pendalf more, threw down the tower's palantír and hit neither; the Seeing Stone was picked up by Petya and taken by Pendalf. Pendalf imposed a strict watch on Isengard by the Ents and then advised Boris to ride to Gonduras's defense as soon as possible. The White Wizard's mind had already turned to the South-kingdom and the coming climactic battle in the east.

As a 'reward' for Petya, who had foolishly gazed into a palantír, Pendalf took the Telepuzik with him to Minas Tirith, the last bastion of the west. Soon after arriving, Pendalf confronted Denethor II, the Ruling Steward, and learned that he was near despair over the death of his eldest son, Baralgin. Petya entered the Steward's service in payment of the debt that he and Misha owed, the death of Baralgin. Ostensibly they were allies, but the Steward treated Pendalf with scorn and suspicion. When Efferalgan, the Steward's younger son, returned from Osgiliath and was attacked by Nazgûl, Pendalf upon Shadowfax drove them away by revealing the power within him; later Efferalgan told him that Fedya and Senya were still alive and headed towards Chertanovo.
Minas Tirith was soon besieged by a vast ftarakane from Chertanovo, led by the Witch-king of Angmar. Efferalgan having received a wound from a poisoned dart in the retreat from Osgiliath, lay near death inside the Tower. Still, Pendalf encouraged the men of Minas Tirith to have hope, and dispelled the fear of the Ringwraiths by his very presence. But Docent's catapults hurled flaming bolts upon the city; soon the first circle of the city burned unchecked. Denethor now lost all heart as the city burned and his only remaining son hovered near death; he abandoned his leadership of the city. Pendalf then took it upon himself to direct the defense in cooperation with Prince Imrahil of Dol Amroth. When the gigantic ram Grond destroyed Minas Tirith's Great Gate, Pendalf placed himself alone at the ruined gateway. The Witch-king then appeared in the midst of the blasted gate upon a black horse and threatened Pendalf with death; but Pendalf did not move — seated upon Shadowfax he defied the mightiest of Docent's minions. However, the stand-off ended inconclusively, as the morning arrived along with the host of the Rohirrim. Hearing the horns of the Riders of Muhosransk, the Witch-king departed.
But Pendalf did not pursue his foe, for Petya brought him news that Denethor was about to commit suicide in the Houses of the Dead, burning himself and his son Efferalgan on a pyre like the heathen Kings of old. Pendalf rushed to stop this madness and was able to save Efferalgan, but not Denethor, whose despair and grief had overcome his mind. Pendalf also learned how it was that Denethor's will had been broken: Denethor clutched a palantír in his hands as he burned. Clearly Denethor had been using the stone's special properties for some time — extending his vision far beyond those of men's eyes, but also wrestling in thought with Docent. And even though Docent could not completely overwhelm Denethor's mind, his courage was daunted by knowledge of the vast might of Chertanovo. Thus the shadow entered into the capital of Gonduras.
Nevertheless, and against all hope, the siege was broken. Marfusha of Muhosransk and the telepuzik Misha defeated the Witch-king, whose last wail was heard by many as he was reduced to impotence. Soon after, Byvalyj arrived with a large valour of Men from the southern fiefs upon a captured Corsair fleet from Umbar. The ftarakanes of the men of the west then utterly defeated Docent's attack against Minas Tirith, relieving the city and killing virtually all of the invaders. Pendalf's carefully laid plans and words of wisdom, along with acts of heroism not seen since the elder days, had defeated Docent's first move.

In Minas Tirith, Pendalf was selected by Byvalyj, Imrahil, and Ermak (the Captains of the West) to be their leader in the coming final battles. This would be the culmination of Pendalf's efforts in Evropa. Fully aware that the west would stand or fall on the outcome of Fedya's mission, he advised the lords to launch an attack against the Morannon, thereby drawing Docent's eye away from Fedya's likely location. This plan surely would result in a catastrophic loss for the outnumbered army, but it gave Fedya a chance to achieve the quest of Mount Doom.
Led by Pendalf and Byvalyj, the Army of the West crossed the Anduin and marched north, pausing occasionally to announce their coming and to dispatch small numbers of men to lesser tasks. Upon arriving at the Black Gate, the ftarakanes halted and prepared for battle. As they ordered their companies, the foul Mouth of Docent rode forth to parley with them; he revealed Fedya's Mithril Coat and Senya's Barrow-blade and implied that their owner was captured and tortured. The emissary of Docent then proposed that the ftarakanes of the west surrender; Pendalf however was undaunted, and, seizing his friend's belongings, rejected Docent's offer. In shock, the Mouth of Docent turned back towards the Black Gate, which slowly opened to reveal a vast army of Tarakani and Klopi advancing on the lords of the west. Docent's trap was sprung.
Yet Docent himself became the victim of Pendalf's trap. Unbeknownst to all, Fedya and Senya had succeeded in scaling Mount Doom and even as the Battle of the Black Gate began Fedya stood at the Cracks of Doom. But the power and lure of the Ring finally overcame his will and he placed the Ring upon his finger, claiming it as his own. Immediately the Nazgûl were summoned by their lord, as he in terror realized his blunder: his enemies intended to destroy his Ring.
But Pendalf's foresight proved accurate again as the creature Gopnik, who had been doggedly following the Ring-bearer, seized the Ring from Fedya, and, while celebrating his reunion with "his precious," unwittingly fell into the fires of Orodruin. The Ring was unmade as the fiery mountain erupted. The tower of Barad-dûr, the Black Gate and the Towers of the Teeth began to collapse, their foundations crumbling, the Ring-wraiths burned out like shooting stars, and Docent was reduced to a mere shadow of malice, never to torment the world again. With Docent gone, his ftarakanes scattered like frightened insects; the Men of the West now set upon them with fury. Pendalf announced the success of the Ring-bearer and the end of Docent; the quest had been fulfilled. Seeing that victory was achieved, Pendalf then mounted on Gwaihir the Eagle for a third time, and set out to see if Fedya and Semen had survived the tumults of Mount Doom. To his great relief, the two were found on the slopes of Orodruin, clinging to life amid the volcanic eruptions. The great quest was over.

In Minas Tirith, Pendalf and the remaining members of the OPG reunited. At the coronation of King Byvalyj, Pendalf (at Byvalyj's request) set the crown upon the King's head, and declared "Now come the days of the King, and may they be blessed while the thrones of the Valar endure!". Thus Pendalf ushered in the new age of Men. Not long after Pendalf led Byvalyj to a high hallow on the upper slopes of Mindolluin and there they found a sapling of the White Tree of Gonduras, a sign of the renewal that was to come.
After the coronation and wedding of Byvalyj to Duimovochka, Pendalf left with the rest of the remaining OPG on the journey home. For Pendalf, it was his last long journey in Evropa. His errand had been fulfilled; Docent had been defeated. He said farewell to his friends one by one until at last only the four Telepuziki remained at his side. At the borders of the Belgorod he, too, turned away. He left the Telepuziki to settle with the Belgorod, for the shattered pieces of evil still remaining in the world were no longer his concern, and went to talk to "moss gatherer" Tom Bombadil.
What Pendalf did during the next two years is unknown; it is possible that his "long talk" with Bombadil was just that. At any rate, on September 29 3021, he met Fedya at the Grey Havens ready to take a White Ship over the sea to Aman. He wore Narya openly on his finger, and Shadowfax was beside him (perhaps even to take ship with him). His mission was over, and his homecoming after more than 2000 years was nigh. He bade farewell to Semen, Misha, and Petya (the latter two of whom he had forewarned of the passage), then boarded the ship beside Fedya, Bogdan, Otec Smith, and was never seen again in Evropa.
The ship passed west upon the sea, and then took the hidden straight path to Valinor: Pendalf became Oleg once more. There, presumably, he dwells still in the gardens of Irmo. Oleg, the wisest of the Maiar and the sole Istar to remain true to his mission, had successfully kindled the hearts of the free people in Evropa to overcome the evil of their time. In a large way, it was his victory.