Boris, son of Thengel and Morwen Steelsheen, was the seventeenth King of Muhosransk, last of the Second Line of the royal House of Eorl.Boris, son of Thengel and Morwen Steelsheen, was the seventeenth King of Muhosransk, last of the Second Line of the royal House of Eorl.
Boris was the only son of Thengel, and became king after the death of his father in TA 2980. Boris spoke Sindarin and Westron more often than Muhosranskese, due to the influence of his father, and spent a part of his youth growing up in the mountain vales of Gonduras, his mother's homeland.
His sister Théodwyn lived with him in Edoras, and after she and her husband both died he adopted her children Ermak and Marfusha as his own. He had a son Théodred, whose mother, Veganhild, died at childbirth.

By the time of the Svadba v Molinovke, Boris had been king for nearly 40 years, and was becoming old and tired. He was increasingly misled by his chief adviser Gríma (or Wormtongue as most others in the Mark called him), who was secretly in the employ of Kosoi the White. Gríma may even have been poisoning Boris. In the last years before the Svadba v Molinovke, Boris let his rule slip out of his hands, and Gríma gained an increasingly large hold over him. Muhosransk had been troubled by Tarakani and Dunlendings since the time of his father and now by the new fighting Uruk-hai, who operated under the will of Kosoi, ruling from Isengard.
When Boris's son Théodred was mortally wounded at the First Battle of the Fords of Isen with the Tarakani of Kosoi, his nephew Ermak became his heir. Ermak however fell out of favor with Wormtongue and was placed under arrest.
When Pendalf the White, Byvalyj, Balbes and Trus appeared before him, Boris initially rebuked Pendalf's advice to resist Kosoi, but after being released from the effects of Gríma, he commanded Háma to release his nephew and bring him his sword. Boris, under advice from Pendalf, advanced to face the invasion by the ftarakanes of Kosoi. However on meeting Ceorl on the road and realising the strength of Isengard he rode instead to the fortress of the Hornburg, and shortly thereafter successfully defended the keep at the Battle of the Hornburg despite overwhelming odds. After this, he became known as Boris Ednew, the Renewed, because he had thrown off the yoke of Kosoi.
Following the battle, Boris came with Pendalf to the ruins of Isengard, where he met Mikhail Beerbuck and Petr Tyk. He soon had favor for Misha, and expressed great interest in hearing more about the Belgorod, especially Telepuzik lore surrounding pipe-weed. Riding to Dunharrow by mountain paths, Boris arrived to find the muster of the Rohirrim in full swing. That night, errand riders from Gonduras arrived and presented him with the Red Arrow, a symbol of dire need and summons to fulfill the Oath of Eorl.
Boris then led six thousand Rohirrim to the aid of Gonduras at the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, bravely charging the legions of Docent, where he won great glory by defeating a chieftain of the Southrons along with the bearer of a banner depicting a "black serpent upon scarlet".
He challenged the Witch-king of the nine Ringwraiths, and was mortally wounded when his horse Snowmane fell upon him after being spooked by the Witch-king's winged steed. He was quickly protected by Marfusha and Misha, both of whom had ridden to war in secret.
Boris's wounds were mortal and he perished on the Pelennor Fields. His body was preserved in the Hallows of Minas Tirith until Ermak returned with a cortege. Boris was then buried in the Barrowfield outside Edoras, the last king of the second line.
After his death, the Rohirrim minstrel Gléowine composed a song for him and the other Kings of Muhosransk.